Glenn Maxwell hit the joint-fastest T20 century for Australia as they kept alive their series hopes against India with a five-wicket win in Guwahati.
Maxwell smashed an unbeaten 104 not out from 48 balls, in a knock which contained eight fours and eight sixes.
Ruturaj Gaikwad's equally brilliant 123 not out from 57 balls helped set Australia a target of 223, which they reached off the final ball.
India now lead the series 2-1 with two matches to play.
"It was a remarkable game of cricket," said Australia bowler Jason Behrendorff, who returned figures of 1-12 from his four overs.
"We're looking to get a series victory and we're one step closer to that. To put on a performance like that is special and we will look to take that momentum into the next game."
Australia knew they had to win the third T20 of the five-match series to stand any chance of winning the series.
India started slowly and were 81-3 in the 11th over, when Tilak Varma came in to partner Gaikwad.
Their explosive partnership put on 141 runs, including 30 off the final over bowled by Maxwell, with Gaikwad becoming the first India player to score a T20 century against Australia.
In response, Australia fell from 66-1 to 134-5 and needed 43 off the final two overs.
Matthew Wade hit Axar Patel for a six and two fours as Australia bludgeoned 22 off the penultimate over before Maxwell went on to make history with his century. He reached three figures off 47 balls, the joint-quickest by an Australian in T20 history, emulating Aaron Finch and Josh Inglis.
In what was a remarkable final over, and one that bowler Prasidh Krishna would want to forget, Maxwell struck a six from the third delivery and followed it with three fours to snatch victory.
The fourth T20 takes place in Raipur on Friday, with the series concluding on Sunday in Bengaluru.
Both sides are set to have less experienced squads for the rest of the series.
Suryakumar was the only India player to have featured in the World Cup final defeat against Australia nine days ago that played in the third T20.
For Australia, World Cup winners Maxwell, Inglis, Marcus Stoinis, Steve Smith, Adam Zampa and Sean Abbott will all return home, leaving Head as the only World Cup winner still in India.
Wicketkeepers Josh Philippe and Ben McDermott, left-arm pace bowler Ben Dwarshuis and off-spinner Chris Green will all link up with the squad for the remainder of the tour.
These comments are now closed.
Gary, Alan and Micah look back at the greatest ones the Premier League has ever seen
Jack Dee chairs the multi award-winning comedy panel game, I'm Sorry I Haven't A Clue
Told in the band's own words with an extensive archive, the story of how The Beatles shaped music
You’ve heard the name Napoleon Bonaparte, but who was he really?
Luke Littler, the 16-year-old who has taken the PDC World Championship by storm this year, says he has been playing "non-stop" since he was 18 months old.
In his third fight of 2023, Anthony Joshua faces Otto Wallin in Saudi Arabia in a fight he must win if he wants to take on Deontay Wilder in 2024.
Luke Littler, 16, reveals his post-match meal after his impressive third-round win over UK Open champion Andrew Gilding at the PDC World Championship.
BBC Sport's Simon Stone looks at the proposals for a new breakaway European competition and assesses what could happen next.
Watch as BBC Sport pundits Alex Scott and Fara Williams exchange funny Christmas gifts with one another.
Harry Kane scores a brilliant long-range goal, his 21st in only his 15th Bundesliga match as Bayern Munich beat Wolfsburg 2-1.
Robin Tiger Williams is making a name for himself on the South African golf tour - but also providing financial support for hard-up black players.
Who gets the most and least rest during the Christmas football schedule? The first Premier League match played on Christmas Eve for 28 years sees Wolves host Chelsea.
In his BBC Sport column, George Groves previews Anthony Joshua and Deontay Wilder's fights in Saudi Arabia on Saturday and tries to pick a winner between the two.