Greg Chappell has said one of the biggest takeaways from the World Cup in India is that the ODI format is in great shape. His vote of confidence in the format comes at a time many pundits of the game have been questioning the format and even have suggested it should be reduced to 40 overs. 

In a chat with Cricbuzz on Friday, The former India coach and a legend of the game paid ultimate tribute to Virat Kohli, who reached an unprecedented milestone of 50 centuries in one-day cricket, before dwelling deeper into the World Cup and the format in as a whole. 

Kohli's feat, Chappell felt, has turned a fantasy into a reality. "The fear of Virat Kohli to become the first man to score 50 centuries in ODI cricket is nothing short of fantastic," Chappell told this website and went on to add, "The fact that he surpassed The Little Master to achieve the feat puts the magnitude of the performance into perspective." 

Kohli achieved this milestone during the semifinal against New Zealand at the Wankhede in Mumbai, surpassing Sachin Tendulkar's record of 49 centuries. Even Tendulkar himself applauded Kohli for reaching this unprecedented milestone. 

Kohli's century played a vital role in ensuring India's place in the final, where they will face Australia. Chappell, who represented Australia in 87 Tests and 74 ODIs during a distinguished 14-year career in the 70s and 80s, has a unique perspective on the upcoming clash between India and Australia 

"It will be up to this highly cohesive Australian team to find something really extra-special from within themselves, if they are to make it their sixth win in eight World Cup finals -- a phenomenal record," Chappell said but pointed out that India look near invincible. "India has played brilliantly and does not have a chink in their armour," Chappell asserted. Australia have been rather vulnerable in the tournament, having started with two defeats, including against India in the sides' first game. 

Australia lead India in the World Cup head-to-head 8-5 but since 2011, India lead the five time champions 3-1. Overall in the ODIs, it is 83-57 in favour of Australia with 10 no results in 150 games. But Australia, one of the knockout giants in world Cricket, and they lead India 2-1 in the World Cup knockouts, having won in the 2003 and the 2015 editions. India had beaten them in 2011 in the quarterfinals in Ahmedabad, the venue of the Sunday's final. 

Chappell said the World Cup has been a great success. "ODI cricket is alive and throbbing, not just thriving, and by many metrics, this tournament has been very successful," Chappell, known to be one of the great cricketing minds, said. "After Sunday, there will be some withdrawal symptoms felt by cricket fans the world over." 