The two most successful teams in the history of ODI World Cup will face off in the final of the 13th edition of the tournament. India have been on a glorious run in the competition with ten wins on the bounce and have scored more runs and taken more wickets than any other side. They chased in each of the first five games, hunting down targets with clinical efficiency and have won on an average of 64 balls to spare. In the last five games they have set the targets on each occasion and won by an average margin of 175 runs. 

Australia, their worthy opponents on Sunday, have had a more bumpy ride to the summit clash but have come with their mettle stress-tested in several high pressure situations. Australia will take confidence from the fact that they are the only side to taste success in white-ball series against India in India in the last eight years, including a 2-1 series win in March earlier this year. 

What does Ahmedabad track have on offer? 

The Motera Stadium in Ahmedabad has an assortment of pitches made of different soils, that has resulted in patterns depending on the type of pitch used rather than the venue as a whole. The average first innings total here in World Cup 2023 is only 251, only Lucknow has it lower at 238, and is one of the two venues where no team has yet scored 300 (Chepauk being the other). 

In the four league stage fixtures here, chasing sides have won three, largely without any jitters. Spinners have found more purchase in the afternoon under the sun where it has offered them hold in the pitch, though not a lot of degree of turn. This match is set to be played on the same pitch as the India-Pakistan game, a contest that lasted under 74 overs. In that match, Indian seamers were able to extract some movement off the pitch as well as some reverse swing in the latter half of Pakistan's innings. When India batted under lights, the conditions were a touch easier with the ball skidding through. That match though was played more than a month ago and with the winter setting in the conditions could vary drastically for the final. 

Spin in Ahmedabad in this World Cup 

The battle of heavyweights 

The best batting side in Powerplay 1 in 2023 will go head on against the most incisive bowling attack - expect fireworks from both camps in this phase. David Warner, Travis Head, and Mitchell Marsh make them the most aggressive top three in world cricket right now, with all three averaging north of 45 and striking at 110+ in the first Powerplay this year. At the opposite corner, you have the frugal but penetrating trio of Jasprit Bumrah, Mohammed Shami and Mohammed Siraj. Between them, they average 20.64 in this phase and concede at just 4.28 per over and is by far the most skillful new ball attack in World Cup 2023. 

Shami has been lethal against left-handers with the new ball in this tournament and has accounted for four southpaws in just 25 balls in the first Powerplay, all from around the wicket angle. Warner has been famously troubled by Stuart Broad with around the wicket angle in Ashes contests while Head too got out in this fashion to Naveen-ul-Haq at Wankhede earlier in the tournament. So, expect Shami, who has got Warner out thrice in ODIs, to attack the left-handed opening pair from around the wicket straightaway when he comes to the attack. 

Australia top three in overs 1-10 in ODIs in 2023 

Marsh has been a scourge for India in ODIs this year and he strikes at well over a run a ball against all three of India's seamers. So don't rule out Ravindra Jadeja bowling in the Powerplay to Marsh (84 balls, 61 runs, 1 dismissal), should Australia lose one of their openers in the early exchanges. 

Siraj has been one bowler in the Indian attack who has been short of his best in this tournament and has a poor head-to-head record against Australia's top three combined (123 runs off 88 balls at 8.38 per over). Australia's top order could target Siraj early on to upset the applecart for Rohit Sharma and make him bowl more overs of Bumrah earlier than he would have ideally desired to. As captain, Rohit has little flexibility given it's a five-men attack. Conversely if India can dent Australia's top order with early strikes, and that would put significant pressure on their misfiring middle order against an attack that is as relentless as any. 

Seam attacks in overs 1-10 in World Cup 2023 

Australia middle order vs India's spin twins 

India's spinners have been accurate to a dot in most of the games in this World Cup and on tracks that offered any amount of turn, they have ripped out the opposition middle order. In the group stage encounter between the two sides, India's spin trio reduced Australia from 74/1 to 140/7 picking six for 104 in 30 overs. Steven Smith, Marnus Labuschagne and Josh Inglis have not fired against top sides in the tournament yet and all three of them strike at under 80 against spin. 

If they get off to a solid start, Australia's all-right middle order could well target Kuldeep Yadav, against whom most have good head to head matchups, rather than the in-form Ravindra Jadeja who turns the ball away from them. Interestingly, Kuldeep Yadav has a good head to head record against two of Australia's best players of spin - Warner (83 balls, 66 runs, 3 dismissals) and Glenn Maxwell (69 balls, 99 runs, 3 dismissals). The latter has got out to left-arm wrist spin twice in the tournament so far and nearly got done in by Noor Ahmad in another. Wickets for seamers upfront would mean a more circumspect approach from batters to Kuldeep which opens more avenues for him to attack. 

How to stop Rohit Sharma? 

45 off 30 vs Pakistan. 39 off 35 vs New Zealand. 40 off 24 vs South Africa. 47 off 29 in the semi-final. Rohit Sharma in Powerplay taking on the best of opposition's bowlers has been a sight to behold and the knock in the semis proved he can bring his A-game even under knockout pressure. His fast starts meant others eased into their designated roles with little pressure early on in their innings to score runs at a fast clip. Rohit has positive matchups against all three of Australia's seamers, of whom Mitchell Starc and Pat Cummins have not been at their best with the new ball in the recent times. 

Josh Hazlewood has been accurate as ever in his first spells in the tournament picking eight wickets and conceding at just 4.08 per over. Australia would want a repeat of his new ball spell from Chennai, which included the scalp of Rohit, to put pressure on India's in form middle order. Rohit has not let any bowler settle with the lengths in this tournament, but clever changes of pace could bring results for seamers as Rohit has fallen to off pace balls not less than thrice, at various stages of his innings, in this tournament. 

Rohit Sharma in Powerplay in World Cup 2023 

India's middle order vs Adam Zampa 

Another crucial matchup of the game would be that of Virat Kohli vs Hazlewood. The fast starts off the blocks from Rohit has helped Kohli ease into his anchor role and bat through the innings - a role he has done with aplomb in this World Cup. Hazlewood has got the better of Kohli five times in the last six ODIs they played against each other (70 balls, 45 runs, five dismissals), three of those off short-pitched deliveries, including in the group game in Chennai. Kohli was also hit on the helmet by Starc later in the Chennai game and got out trying to pull Hasan Ali down the ground. Expect Hazlewood to test Kohli with similar lengths early on in his innings. 

Adam Zampa will be another vital cog in Australia's bowling attack with him having wood over most of India batters. Among their batters, only Kohli averages 35-plus against Zampa in ODIs. The Ahmedabad wicket has offered hold for spinners, especially in the first half under the sun, and with big square boundaries on offer it should make him a threat for India in the middle phase. On either side of Kohli, Shubman Gill and Shreyas Iyer have been rampant against spin in this World Cup hitting at 105 and 102 respectively letting the No.3 hold up one end in the middle stages. It will be up to the Gill-Iyer duo to take down Zampa and Maxwell, the latter who has been economical allowing Australia to get through ten overs of the fifth bowler seamlessly. He picked up a four wicket haul against India in the Rajkot ODI that just preceded the World Cup. 

Zampa vs India batters in ODIs 