Just one step away from a second World title in 2023, Pat Cummins, the Australian captain, wore a calm, serene expression on the eve of a match that may well define his legacy as an Australian captain. And it wasn't a contrived expression, but an assured one.

Australia have had to deal with more crises than India in the tournament, and have even tasted rockbottom, two games in. However, they have now won 8 matches on the trot, and India, ten. With all the hullabaloo over the pitch at the Wankhede, Cummins showed indifference when asked about the conditions in Ahmedabad.

"I'm not a great pitch reader, but it looked pretty firm. They've only just watered it, so yeah, give it another 24 hours and have a look, but it looks like a pretty good wicket. I think it's been a bit more high scoring here (than Kolkata) throughout the tournament, so yeah, hard to say."

Cummins played down the talks of India avenging the 2003 World Cup final loss 20 years ago, arguing that none of the players from that team remain, but admitted that the pressure of playing in front of over a hundred thousand Indian fans is likely to be an experience of a lifetime.

"Yeah, I mean, neither player from both sides were there in 2003, so it feels like a long time ago, but we know it's going to be a packed house. There's going to be 130,000 fans here supporting India. So, it's going to be awesome."

The Australian captain also admitted that India have been a

formidable side, but that Australia have played India in India regularly in the last few years, and it is unlikely to take them by surprise.

"They've been playing really well, undefeated this tournament. But we know at our best we can give them a good shake. We've played them quite a lot over the last couple years with success so it's all building up for a nice final."

Cummins also lauded the opening bowlers Mitchell Starc and Josh Hazlewood, who haven't been at their best in the powerplay in the World Cup, but turned up with an incisive spell in the semi-final against South Africa on Thursday (November 16).

"The way he (Starc) bowled a couple of nights ago in Kolkata was fantastic - bowled seven straight a couple of key wickets and could have easily had a couple of more," said Cummins, in appreciation of his opening bowlers. "The opening partnership between him and Josh Hazlewood's going to be a big one for us. Yeah, we saw what impact they can have in a game when they bowl like they did the other night. So, they're both big game players, played in a few ICC finals now, so they know what it takes."

Recalling Australia's league game against India earlier in the World Cup, Cummins admitted that it wasn't their best batting performance, but also reminded the press that they were one catch away from being on the driver's seat.

"I don't think we scored par in that first game but we're one catch away from potentially being in front of that game. We won an ODI series here early on in the year. There's lots of moments we can

draw on where we've had success against a really good Indian side."

The Australian skipper admitted that they had to embrace upsetting the crowd, and relish the chance to silence them whenever they could, so that they could finish the day with no regrets, regardless of the result.

"I think you've got to embrace it. The crowd's obviously going to be very one-sided but it's also in sport there's nothing more satisfying than hearing a big crowd go silent and that's the aim for us tomorrow. Yeah, you've just got to embrace every part of it, every part of a final even you know in the lead-up there's going to be noise and more people and interest and you just can't get overwhelmed. You got to be up for it, you got to love it and just know whatever happens it's fine but you just want to finish the day with no regrets."

When asked if Cummins ever thought it would be curtains for Australia after losing two on the trot and struggling briefly against Sri Lanka, Cummins was honest in his response, admitting that negative thoughts did, indeed, creep in, but that the team redeemed themselves to produce a flawless performance.

"The proposition at that stage was basically we had to be flawless to make it through to the semis. And fortunately, we were. But yeah, absolutely, we knew we came up against two very good sides (India and South Africa) to start off with, but we were off the pace so we knew that we had to change pretty drastically and yeah, glad we did."

Cummins also put a positive twist on not being able to play a

complete game, inferring that it hasn't needed their best performance to reach the final, and that the players were hungry enough to scrap out unlikely wins.

"I think one of the pleasing things is I still don't feel like we've played the complete game," said Cummins. "There have been no huge wins. We've had to fight for every win, but we've found a way to win. And different players have stood up at different times.

"So, I think taking that confidence, knowing that we don't have to be at our absolute best to challenge any team we can find a way through it. Yeah, I'm sure we'll draw a lot of confidence, all the boys draw a lot of confidence from that going into tomorrow."

When asked if Marcus Stoinis, the extra all-rounder, was a possibility ahead of Marnus Labuschagne in case of a batting-friendly wicket, Cummins said that it was a possibility that the thinktank had considered.

"Potentially yeah, those are things we weigh up before every game. We're lucky, we've got a 15-man squad who we feel anyone can step in and perform. They're all ready to go. So, like every other game, we go through a process where coaches get together and chat through what they think or how they think the game's going to go about and then the selectors obviously pick the final eleven."

Having already clinched the World Test Championship final against the same opposition earlier in the year, and subsequently The Ashes as well, the significance of the year was not lost on Cummins.

"I mean, it's been a huge year. There are four marquee events. If you have one of those in an off season, it's a big off season. We've got four of them. So being really proud of all those things you mentioned, not only the wins but the guys have spent, for some of the guys, probably spent less than a couple of weeks in their own bed since the end of the Aussie summer. One thing that's stayed consistent has been the morale in the group. The guys have been awesome. They're so up for every game they play. And to put ourselves in a position of this, it would just top off an incredible year and probably a career-defining year that a lot of us will look back on in years to come and be pretty proud of," he said.

With the difference in temperature between Kolkata and Ahmedabad being nearly 7-8 degrees Celsius, Cummins admitted that it will play a factor, in addition to the dew, but only in the final phase of the game.

"I think the biggest difference is the dew. This city and venue seems to have more dew than a lot of the other places we play. So perhaps, yeah, that's something to think about ahead of tomorrow. Again, it might only be the last quarter of the game but once that settles in and the ball is sliding on, it's quite different to say the first 20 overs where it might be swinging. So, something to consider. You've got to weigh up batting during the day when it might be a bit easier than under lights, but knowing that late in the second innings it could also slide on."

When asked about the legacy of Australia in World Cups, and the prospect of joining the pantheon of captains who have won World Cups for Australia, Cummins said that it would be a massive achievement, and that it was a privilege to captain the Australian side in a World Cup.

"It would be huge. We were all kids not too long ago, watching some of those great teams win the '99, 2003, 2007 World Cups," said Cummins. "That's the opportunity ahead of us tomorrow, which is really exciting. To be captain would be an absolute privilege to lift the trophy with these great bunch of blokes. In terms of the pinnacle, I think it is right up there, it's got the longest history of a world event where all the teams compete.

"You only get a shot at it every four years. So even if you have a long career, you might only play in two of these events. 2015 is still a career highlight for me, so I think tomorrow if we win, we might pip it."

However, Cummins squashed all theories of Australia being the favourites in the final, stressing that it was an even contest against a terrific Indian side, even though there are many members of a World-Cup winning side (2015) in the squad.

"I think it's going to be an even match. I think you can make a case for either side. The good thing is I think we've got six or seven guys that won it in 2015 so we know that feeling. Even more of the guys that were there in the T20 World Cup, different format, but pretty much everyone, at least a dozen of the 15, have won a World Cup and know what it takes and know that feeling and won't be afraid to go out there and be brave and take the game on."