It all came together for Australia in the final. A World Cup they started with back-to-back losses came to a close with Pat Cummins, their captain, holding the trophy aloft in Ahmedabad. 
 Here's how the players reacted to Australia's six-wicket win over India in the final, a victory which took their ODI World Cup title count to six. 
 David Warner: "Our bowlers were fantastic, they were flowing from the last game, they set the tone from ball one. The fielding again tonight supported that. To bowl India out for 240 in a final is absolutely exceptional. There was a bit of nervous energy up in the change room. We had a dressing room part and a lunch room part, we kept changing places. Fantastic partnership between Marnus (Labuschagne) and Trav (Head). What a comeback that was from Head, especially after coming back from injury and to score a century in a World Cup final in front of a jam-packed crowd, it's phenomenal." 
 Steve Smith: "Incredible feeling! Atmosphere was amazing today. Great performance as Davey just said. The bowlers set the tone, fielding was great. Travis Head... the show he put on was just incredible. Took the game on and even when we were 3 for 60-odd, he kept going and played his game. I thought Marnus played another unbelievable knock and played a great supporting role. Was a great partnership. Wasn't the ideal start for us (with the two losses) but we had the belief and we have got a good group of players. Fortunately we were able to do that and then had to get into the top four, once we did that, Australia typically plays well in those moments. It has been a dream come true to win another final. It's been a pretty big year for us winning the Test championship and this. Yeah, it was pretty good fun." 
 Mitchell Starc: "He (Cummins) was phenomenal, he's been phenomenal all tournament in his decision-making, his leadership. At times, he had to step up with the ball when it's been a bit flat. Capped off an unbelievable eight weeks for this group. I haven't got any words left. Between Pat, Ron (Andrew McDonald) and all our coaching staff, all our players across formats, it's been an incredible winter. I don't think you could write a script to top the win that we've had. To win a World Cup in India, it's been a fantastic eight weeks . Bloody successful and bloody enjoyable." 
 Mitchell Marsh: "Pure elation right now. I was telling this to the boys earlier, it's been the hardest 8 weeks of cricket I was a part of. To be here with this group, it feels unbelievable. We were down and out when Sri Lanka were none for 120, seems a long time ago. Unbelievable, absolutely unbelievable!" 
 Marnus Labuschagne: "Oh mate! What we've achieved today is unbelievable, the best achievement I have been part of. To just come to India... they were 10 from 10 with one to play with. They (India) have been the team of the tournament, they've been unbelievable. But we knew if we played our best cricket, we had a chance. Our bowlers have been sensational and then Travis put on a hell of a show. It was great to be a part of it. You guys know I am a man of faith and believe in God. How things have panned out for me, unbelievable. It's just amazing. I am lost for words. The number of times I thought that I was done, even last night the team didn't get named till 10. Very thankful to the coaches for sticking with me. Three months ago in South Africa, I wasn't even part of the team. So, to play 19 games straight from there is a miracle. big thanks to God for that." 
 Josh Hazlewood: "This is bigger (than 2015). We won at home in front of our home fans but the challenges that we've been through in the last couple of months, coming here, playing in these conditions against India which is a pretty special team. To win on a day like this is amazing. Such a great crowd, Indian fans are second to none, a few started to leave towards the end, amazing crowd. That's just the belief in the squad. Lost two in two, obviously to two of the top teams in the tournament. Obviously just got on a run and tonight it's the perfect game, we put it together when it counts." 
 Glenn Maxwell: "(On winning shot) Bit of a slog but it feels amazing, we were all excited when it got back down to 20 runs. I resigned myself to the fact that I wouldn't have to bat like 2015, but obviously Heady got out and I had to go out there and finish the job. It is a bit different when you see Head take on Bumrah and you're next in, I was told I have got a taste of my own medicine. Marnus was soaking in the pressure. Head's ball-striking in a final under pressure was phenomenal and Marnus was second to none. It was an unbelievable partnership." 