Rohit Sharma is in supreme batting form and living in a dream life in 2019 World Cup. So far he has scored five 100s in a single edition of a World Cup and it is a record.

The ‘Hit Man’ is proper sobriquet for Rohit that has been adopted by cricket fans not only in India but across other cricket playing nation also.

The vacuum which was created after the retirement of Sachin Tendulkar and Virender Sehwag especially at the opening position has been filled with tremendous energy by Rohit and Shikhar.

Unfortunately, due to a thumb injury, Shikhar was ruled of the tournament but Rohit didn’t even flinch for a moment and continued his flawless batting with another partner. There was one key illustration of Rohit’s personality that has been a fashionable adage:

He is very lazy and his laziness can be seen while he is at the batting crease.

Technically, the word laziness may not be the proper phrase in world of sports to delineate someone’s ability but his batting style and art of scoring runs and hitting boundaries (4s & 6s) with such an ease that makes anyone to say ‘Wow what a six with such a lazy back-lift and that is frumpy to fabulous shot by him’.

This is what Rohit Sharma with decrepit style has been doing since he made his debut in an International Cricket. No efforts in hitting boundaries, no energy from bat, no power, no strong bottom hand, no sweet sound from bat, no stand & delivery shot, no wrist work, just perfect timing, sheer class with an effortless art of making piece of wood willow into a magician’s wand.

Rohit’s 3 ODI double hundreds (209, 264 and 208*), the feat that is still to conquer, earned several sobriquets like ‘Run Machine’ and ‘Hit Man’ which are perfect to his batting career.

These three big hundreds showed that he has a voracious appetite for scoring runs and he is the ‘Run Machine’ of India. If you watch these innings, you would notice that none of the cover drives is as flamboyant as of Sachin’s and there were no square cut played by him like Sehwag used to play but Rohit’s 3 double hundreds scored with such ease makes him effortless player and looks like he knows how to conquer intricacy with such ease.

Rohit Sharma’s press conference after World cup matches are also a testimony to his effortless and laziness lifestyle. Rohit’s simple answers, without added masala (flavour), to media’s questions which are usually full of bouncers, resemble his batting style that he is doing the things effortlessly with a stint of bit laziness in it.