OUR FIRST FAMILY Home was a small Edwardian-style weatherboard, built on a large block on the corner of Bronte Court and Thomas Street, Hampton – a leafy middle-class suburb in the south-east of Melbourne. I used my little feet to scoot around the place, crashing my plastic motorbike into anything that came my way. It took a while to learn to steer. I was just 14 months when I gashed my forehead, smashing into a concrete step by the back door, but that had nothing on the busted legs a couple of years later. Some kid at nursery jumped off a mound and landed on my legs – snap.

I was three-and-a-half years old and was in traction for a few days at the Royal Children’s Hospital. Mum and Dad weren’t allowed to sleep over in those days and I pleaded with them every evening not to leave, often screaming in fear of what might happen next. They reckon it was pretty traumatic. When I got out of hospital I was plastered from neck to knee. It was a spiral fracture and nothing was supposed to move for months during the healing period, so I lay flat on a trolley and scooted round the house on that too.

Life wasn’t easy for my folks. Not having a specific professional qualification, Dad did all sorts of work – cane cutting, house re-blocking and office and sales jobs, as I’ve mentioned, including a spell at Pink Pages. He landed a good one with Prudential Insurance and the two of them further subsidised family costs by taking on after-hours contract cleaning. Dad washed and polished the floors at the blood bank in the city and Mum looked after offices in nearby Sandringham. She took me and my brother, Jason – who had been born, like me, in Ferntree Gully, 21 months after his elder bro – with her, and we helped by emptying bins and tidying up. At least, we thought we did. We probably just got in the way.

Don’t ask me how it came about, but Mum also worked for Bob Hawke’s wife, Hazel, cleaning the house and helping out when Bob had meetings or events at home in Royal Avenue, Sandringham. We used to have a hit on Bob’s tennis court and, as we grew up, he used to come and play with us, often introducing us to visiting heavies – politicians and celebrities – who played too. We loved Bob, still do: Australia’s best-ever Prime Minister in my opinion. We had beautiful neighbours in Thomas Street. The mother of the family was a friendly lady called Marge Lucas, who used to keep an eye out for me on my bike or walking home from school and leave out a pint of silver-top milk in the old bottles. Sometimes she’d make me a Blue Heaven milkshake and, right to this day, I pass shops – like the old-fashioned fish-and-chip places – and nip in to see if they’ve got ’em. It’s like a sort of bubble-gum vanilla ice-cream – amazing. My daughter Brooke, who works in a local cafe, surprises me with one sometimes. Good girl, Brookie!

It was in this neighbourhood, often in the park across the road, that I was an AFL champion and an Aussie cricketer, a dreamer, a rock star and budding petrol head. Dad loved cars; Jase and I used to help him clean them at weekends. He had a Ford GT Phase III prototype – only a few were ever made. At different times, he also had a Corvette Stingray, a Holden Monaro GTS and a Brock Group A and Group 3 Holden Commodore (named after the legendary Australian driver Peter Brock). When I was about 17, I remember saying to myself while we were washing the Group A Commodore, ‘One day I’m going to have a car like this.’ It was a blue Brock Commodore and I’d sit in the driver’s seat, take hold of the steering wheel and imagine cruising round the ’hood. By now, Dad was working in the pest-control business and he was away a lot, but when he was home I badgered him to play ball or to wash the car together  – stuff sons and fathers do. Then I started to travel everywhere with him, in the back of the Ford GT.

That Ford was something. It was a prototype that was put together at the factory in Geelong for the big Phase IIIs. A guy called Al Turner, I think, who was a Ford team manager at the time, tested it down Conrod Straight at Bathurst. It did an astonishing 164 miles per hour (264 kilometres per hour) and then it came up for sale after testing. Dad borrowed some money and bought it at Preston Ford in Essendon – how they got hold of it, I don’t know. Anyway, Dad had it and I loved it. It was just a brutal car and magnificent. He wrote it off eventually, which gave the insurance company a shock.

I’ve had a few great cars myself: Ferrari 355, Ferrari 360, Lamborghini Superleggera (probably the best I’ve ever had, an unbelievable car), Lamborghini Murcielago, Mercedes, BMW, and wait for it – yep, a blue Brock Commodore of my own. Boom! When I’m away, Dad takes the cars of the moment round the block, or further – ‘to make sure everything is okay’, he says. ‘Yeah, Dad, right, just make sure you fill ’em up when you’re done!’ I love that he does that.

I think I was seven when we moved to Beach Road in Black Rock, a few kilometres from Hampton. The day we arrived, we found a cat that had been hit by a car and was badly beaten – battered, actually – but it was still alive. We nursed it back to health and called it Rocky, because at that stage the Rocky movies were out. And like the cat, Rocky didn’t give up. I loved that cat. I had two other pets, both dogs – one a tiny white fluffy poodle that I was too young to remember much about and a terrier called Bronte, after our home at Bronte Court. Bronte and I got on really well and he followed me to school most days – me on my bike, him jogging along behind. Then, one day, Bronte was hit by a car and killed. I was devastated and never wanted a dog again. I suppose it was my first emotional hit and I didn’t like it one bit.

The best of the guys out on the street was David Beck. As kids, we were inseparable and he had a hot sister called Sarah, who kept us all interested. Life was simple then – you know, from hide and seek to sport, music, cars and girls. We all worshipped the Fonz from the TV show Happy Days and the top footy players – they were our heroes.

Becky saved my life once. We lived right opposite Half Moon Bay, where the HMAS Cerberus, which was used as a guard ship and munitions store in the First World War, had been sold for scrap and sunk as a breakwater off the bay in the 1920s. Jase, Becky and I used to swim out there and in and out of the hull. One day a group of us were diving off the painted railings on the pier, and I lost my footing on the new gloss paint Dad had warned me about. As if you listen at 13! So I was trying to dive out and over the jetty but, well, got it wrong. My head hit the edge of the pier and it knocked me out.

I was floating face down when Becky saw me, went for the leap, made it and turned me over. Some of the other lads helped to drag me out, while another one ran to the house and called Dad. He fixed me up. I ended up with a small scar near my eye, that’s all. Lucky boy. Unfortunately, I’ve lost contact with Becky. Pity, because he was a great bloke and as good an all-round sportsman as I’ve ever seen.

Anyway, here’s a story. Mum used to cook up a storm and we’d all eat everything. One day, Jason was diagnosed with a nasty infected ear. Mum had read an old wives’ tale about treating ear infections with warm onion juice – apparently, it would reduce swelling and relieve the pain. So she heated up an onion, extracted the juice and syringed a few drops into Jason’s ear. It worked – eureka! – but apparently all this attention on Jason, and these onions, put me off my food, so much so that one night I refused to eat. The next night too, and the next. I just ran out of interest in food and have never recovered it. Not until I met Elizabeth Hurley anyway, who improved my diet from nachos, pizza, cheese toasties and spaghetti bolognese to the healthier stuff. I haven’t stuck with it enough. Blame Mum and the onions.

By the way, I must explain ‘Harry’ as well. It used to be a running joke in my family and it started out with Jason and me calling Dad ‘Harry’. I don’t know why, we just did. I think it was because he looked like Clint Eastwood – Dirty Harry. Then for some reason Mum became Harry as well. Then they both started calling me Harry. So I called Jase Harry. Imagine what that was like round the house! Someone would shout ‘Harry’ and everyone would answer. Nuts. But funny.

I’d started school life at Sandringham Primary and pretty quickly was riding my bike to get there. We played a lot of football and cricket in the street and tennis behind the Country Women’s Association flats, which were a couple of doors up from us. Dad looked after the maintenance of the courts and in return we got to use them for free.

We had 10 cents a week pocket money and could supplement it with 20 cent  jobs like washing the car, putting the bins out, clearing the leaves, cutting the edges of the lawn real neat. Then I’d buy 10 cents worth of chips for the bike ride to school, stuff them in my backpack and get into them at the first traffic lights. Actually, a 10 cent bag of lollies was the best value – a banana stick, a chocman, spearmint leaf, strawberry cream, the lot. After the ‘Oniongate’ scene at home, I didn’t eat much, except toast with vegemite, and pizza maybe. I was skinny like you wouldn’t believe, until I went to England in 1989 and discovered pints.

It was a 25-minute bike ride from our place to school and you picked up mates along the way, forming a gang. The girls were in too: Lisa Tregenza, who I had the hots for; Carmel Finlay, who was a great girl, really easy-going; and Pauline Vaughan and Michelle Scott, who I had crushes on at different stages of school life. In my head, I was going to marry Michelle. I haven’t seen or heard of any of them since! Lisa was the first girl to make me nervous. She was a bit older than the rest of us and I’d leave home early in the hope of catching some time with her on our own before the other guys turned up. That didn’t work out much, though! I’ve often wondered what happened to Lisa, and especially to Michelle. Jase and I were right into ‘Little Athletics’ too: getting fit, meeting a lot of good mates, learning about competition and setting goals for improvement. On Saturdays we were always at the East Sandringham Boys Club. There were matches for the Under 10s in both footy and cricket but I was slow on the take for cricket, preferring tennis back then. Dad, Jason and I played a lot of tennis and kicked a footy all day long – park, side streets, yard, wherever. We were all about sport – if you didn’t play you were on the outer. We did the drive-in sometimes, when you’d hook up your car radio to an AM station with the speaker on and watch movies with Mum and Dad. But never on Fridays. It was always early to bed on Friday to be good for Saturday sport.

We finally caught on to cricket during Kerry Packer’s unbelievable World Series Cricket era, a kind of fever in the late ’70s. I went with Jase to the first game out at Waverley. WSC came out of nowhere and captured our imagination like the sport hadn’t done before. It’s hard to exaggerate the impact it had on all of Australia, not to mention the rest of the cricketing world. It was the rock and roll of the moment, both sexy and cool. Previously when we watched a Test match, there were players we didn’t know, all in the same white gear, with only one camera behind the bowler’s arm – and the wicketkeeper’s arse every second over – filming them and low-key commentary talking about it all. The kids of the day couldn’t understand what was going on, and there was no-one to ignite their interest, so they didn’t much care about it.

The second year of World Series Cricket, 1978/79, was when I have my first recollections of playing the sport in the backyard. Jason’s favourite player was the South African fast bowler Garth Le Roux, so Jase bowled for the World XI and I batted for Australia – the Chappells mainly and Rod Marsh. The back gate was the wicket and we played these elaborate games mimicking all those guys. We could all do a Viv Richards and a pretty good Chappelli, with his shirt unbuttoned, collar up, chewing gum, looking like he was at war. 

We’d imitate Dennis Lillee too, with his shirt unbuttoned as well, all the way down to his navel, his appeals, the way he wiped the sweat from his forehead with a flick of his right forefinger; Greg Chappell, upright and elegant and so determined; David Hookes, so exciting. All of them in the backyard against guys like Le Roux, Barry Richards and Clive Rice – the South Africans we missed. Of all the players in WSC, the stand-out was Viv. Even today, he’s the best batsman I’ve ever seen. From when I was 10, Viv stood alongside Peter Knights from Hawthorn footy club and Trevor Barker of St Kilda – they were both spectacular, flamboyant players – as a sporting god in my eyes. It was Trevor who christened me ‘Hollywood’, by the way.

I’ll talk later on in the book about Wisden’s five players of the century, but my men of that century were Kerry Packer, Austin Robertson, John Cornell, Richie Benaud, Tony Greig and Ian Chappell – those guys changed cricket forever and made it better and more lucrative for those of us who followed. In fact, every player since should say a huge thank you to them every day! To me World Series Cricket was the best cricket ever played. I’ve watched hours of it on film and haven’t seen anything better. I really wish the stats from those matches counted in the career averages of the players.

Anyway, I played footy all winter at East Sandy and then Dad suggested I start playing cricket at the club in summer as well. But even though I was into the WSC thing, I still hadn’t found the passion for cricket that was to eventually consume my life. Living over the road from the beach and with all my friends hanging out there, I was like, ‘Damn, I’m standing in a field for six hours – I’d rather be down the beach!’ I was alright, though, a batsman mainly. I tried wicketkeeping and fast bowling, anything to keep interested. I was about 10 or 11 when I started to bowl a few leg-breaks for the first time.

It wasn’t until I was 11, though, training in the nets, that I tried mimicking Kim Pitt, who was the club’s first-team spinner. It came out great and I kept doing it. Everyone at the club paid some attention then. So did I, as I could spin it, albeit inconsistently.

I should say a few extra words about Dad. He sacrificed everything for me and Jason, working all hours to put a roof over our head. He’s a popular guy and a smart guy but, as I’ve mentioned, he was brought up the hard way and, on occasions, he wasn’t afraid to let us know. He’s spot on with all his advice, although unfortunately I don’t listen to it as much as I should. Why? Because he’s my dad. Duh! If he was my financial adviser, I’d probably say, ‘Yeah that’s a great idea,’ but because it’s my dad, it’s like, ‘Yeah, okay, Dad,’ and I miss out. One Christmas I wanted a new bike but money was tight so Dad built me one from scratch himself – it was a super-cool bike too. He saved money on that so he could buy me the new blue-coloured footy boots that all the guys were using. How thoughtful is that!

He was strict, though. I remember a few times arguing with him in the car before slamming the door and walking off, and he’d jump out and grab me and say, ‘Respect the car. This is my car – treat it with respect or there’s trouble.’ I remember Jase came home drunk one night when he was 16 or 17 and threw up everywhere. Dad wasn’t happy. He said, ‘You do whatever you want in your house but this is the family home – you don’t vomit in the family home,’ and he made him get down on his hands and knees and clean it up with a spoon and an empty milk carton. Jase never came home drunk again – neither did I. As I’ve said, it wasn’t tender loving care in our house. At times I resented how strict it was – when we were younger, we had dinner at 6 pm and bed at eight (we couldn’t even watch Prisoner!) – which is why I’m more lenient with my own kids. I sure learnt a lot from Mum and Dad but definitely didn’t adopt enough of what I learnt. For example, my grandfather on Dad’s side died of emphysema but Dad stayed a smoker for 27 years until, guess what, his lung collapsed. I was 16 when he finally stopped and it was about then that I started full on. Mum was really disappointed: ‘I’ve just got rid of a bloke who smoked for 27 years, now you start, Harry. You’re stupid.’

I’d started smoking a few years before that, though. Jase smoked a bit too. We used to hide cigarettes under the fire hydrant in the street around the corner in a plastic cover – Peter Jackson 10-packs that cost about 30 cents. Mum and Dad knew where they were, of course, and the next time we went back it was like, ‘Jesus, someone has taken our smokes again.’ We used to rub berries on our hands so you couldn’t smell it but they knew.

When Jase and I were 11 or 12, Dad locked us in a closet. He said, ‘If you guys want to smoke, here’s a pack each. You’re not coming out until you’ve smoked the lot.’ I was violently ill after a couple of smokes, coughing and spluttering, shouting, ‘Dad, let me out!’ But Jase stayed in there for hours, smoked the lot and then came out and said, ‘Any more, Dad? How many more you got?’ That was Jase.

Dad was not a cricketer but he decided he wanted to play with his boys. I reckon I was about 16 by then, and he’d watch us in matches in the morning and then come and field in the arvo when we were playing in the seniors. He was no cricketer – he batted at 11 and didn’t bowl – but he had a great throw and caught pretty well. Then after a Saturday afternoon game, he’d take us down to the bottle store and buy us a beer. At least we thought he did. It was alcohol-free but Jase and I thought we were such dudes having a beer every Saturday with Dad. It was so cool, a lovely thing for him to do.

We shared a lot, as boys and their fathers do – sport and music, family mates. We all got on. During my playing career, if Dad was anywhere near the dressing-room the Vics guys and Aussie guys would always say, ‘Hey, Keith, come on in for a beer,’ and he’d hang out there with Boon and Marsh, AB, Merv and Mark Taylor. They all loved having him around. He’s a good talker, a kind man and no ego.

Year on year I was doing great at footy, and at 16 years old, after kicking 16 goals in one match and eight in the next, I was picked in a representative side to go down to Tasmania. There was this guy, Peter Hudson, who was one of the best full-forwards in the history of the sport. He’d retired by now and owned a pub in Tassie. He watched me kick those goals and wanted me billeted at the pub but they wouldn’t let minors in, so I missed out. They say he kept an eye on me – ‘Who is this kid: he must be a talent’ – but unfortunately I never met him. He was right in a way, but not how he expected!

I was locked between football and tennis. The next summer, still 16, up at Tulip Street I played Section 1 men’s tennis and had daily lessons, but I was still playing cricket – and I was liking it more with each day. The tennis even impacted on footy training and I remember going to my coach, Les Burkwood, who said I was a pussy for playing the sport. I mean, in those days Borg and McEnroe were cool – and I liked Jimmy Connors’ passion too – but Aussie Rules was king.

I still remember Dad saying, ‘If you’re not playing football, you have to tell the coach.’ I was terrified of the bloke. Les told me I was taking a soft option, but anyway, that was that and I had a year off footy – and cricket too – and played tennis non-stop all year round. I was super fit and ranked three in Victoria in my age group.

All that came to an abrupt end at the start of the next summer. I was in Year 9 and playing for Hampton High, when I was chosen for a combined High Schools cricket match against Mentone Grammar. I got six wickets and made a quick 60. Then I played football for the same combined High Schools team – again against Mentone Grammar – and kicked 10. The people there said, ‘Hang on, this bloke has just taken six wickets and made 60, and now he’s kicked 10 against us in the footy. He’s pretty good – he needs to be at our school.’

They approached Dad and offered me a scholarship, which was pretty cool at the time. Dad wanted Jason there too but couldn’t afford full fees, so he cleverly negotiated a discount! So the tennis stopped, and from then on I was focused totally on the football and cricket.

Out of nowhere, there we were at Mentone Grammar and suddenly had these unbelievable cricket facilities – turf pitches, all sorts. I had two wonderful South African coaches – John Mason, who had something wrong with his leg and sat on a shooting-stick running practice sessions, and Barry Irons, who had a big moustache and really knew the game.

I was a number four batsman and part-time leg-spinner. I just wasn’t consistent enough, though, bowling a good one here and there, then two shockers, and trying a flipper that was just a fast seamer. Anyway, in my first year, the summer of 1985, I went on a trip down to Gippsland, in south-east Victoria, to a first XI tournament. Being just a new kid I wasn’t expecting to play, but I was picked for the second game and broke the teeth of the wicketkeeper with a big leg-break that fizzed and bounced and whacked him full in the mouth, messing up his teeth. People were thinking, ‘Who is this bloke?!’ I slogged a few with the bat too. We won the tournament and I ended up captain of the cricket side and of the Associated Grammar Schools team, batting at four and ripping out some liquorice-allsort leg-spinners, but breaking all sorts of records. That was really the start of the cricket thing.

School’s Out

Of course, it wasn’t just sport at Mentone Grammar, and it wasn’t all fun and games. When I was in Year 12, I remember one teacher smashing me across the face with a text book. Those old Year 12 text books were big. I got up and was looking for something to throw at him and saw a hard-backed duster. It hit him straight in the balls. There was a big white outline of the duster on his pants and everyone in the class was laughing.

Predictably, he sent me to the principal, Keith Jones, who was a decent bloke. I admitted that I was being a smart arse in class, disruptive and disinterested, but I also said that the teacher couldn’t belt me across the face and get away with it. Jones said that what I’d done was no good – ‘You know the routine, Warne, pull your blazer up, pull your pants down, I’m going to practise my golf swing on you.’ Then, not for the first time, he gave me six of the best – six smashings on the arse with a cane. I got it in exactly the same spot, not six different spots, and I knew about it.

A few of us used to get caned a bit by Jones and in the end we worked out a plan. Sometimes we’d wear four or five pairs of jocks because we figured that if we got sent out of class we were going to get the cane. The extra padding was just in case we got hammered.

I seemed to get a lot of those smashings – more than most. They started in Year 11 and they happened about once a fortnight; a combination between Jones and this bloke Sergeant Evans, who took a real disliking to me. Our school had a cadet program, where kids would be kitted out in army uniform and get taught some of the basics of army training – marching and all that. We had to wear the khaki green stuff – big black boots, belt, etc – and you had to be able to see your reflection in everything. You had to get the Brasso and shine up the buckle of the belt and polish up the leather as well. You had to polish your shoes too and if anything wasn’t perfect, it was, ‘Right, into my office.’ That wasn’t the only reason Sergeant Evans didn’t like me that much, though. It was the usual stuff – my lippy backchat and unwillingness to conform, as well as smoking on the bus or at school.

He used to sneak onto the Cromer Road bus that went from my place in Black Rock, down Beach Road, left up Balcombe, then down Cromer, dropping the girls off first at Mentone Girls Grammar and then the boys. We used to have a few smokes up the back of the bus and he’d appear out of nowhere, catching us out. He nailed me all the time – whether it was smoking or whatever. 

‘WARNE!!!!’

I hated the bloke and in the end I was doing this stuff on purpose just to piss him off. One night, Mum saw the stripes on my bum – welts actually. She reckoned I was a bit of a mongrel at the time and probably deserved most of what I was getting, but, she said to them, do you have to smash him that bad? There was something about sportsmen and the army, I reckon, as if Sergeant Evans figured we had a sense of entitlement – us blokes with a bit of flair and personality, a bit of spunk – and that it needed taking down a peg or two. He might have had a point.

Everyone liked the principal, even though he used to belt us. He was respected for running a fantastic school. There was another wonderful teacher called Tony Drinan, a legend – everyone loved Tony. Me and my mates from school used to bump into him at the footy, watching St Kilda play at Moorabbin; he was always on the piss. We’d shout ‘Tony!!’ and he’d give us a thumbs up, hammering down those beer cans. See, he loved St Kilda – he was passionate about the club – and he sat there in the outer never missing a minute. Sometimes he’d say to me, ‘What have you done to upset Sergeant Evans this time, mate?’ I’d tell him and he’d say, ‘Hang on in there, keep your cool, don’t wind him up anymore.’ And then we’d go back to talking footy while he knocked back the beer. I’m writing about this because school is so different today. In the mid-1980s, that kind of stuff was the norm – not just at our school, but all schools. If you went to a private school, you’d get the cane. At a public school, like Hampton High, it was more likely the ruler across the hand. That hurt too. I think it bred tougher kids. These guys now, they get it easy and they’re so spoilt. I’m the worst – I spoil my kids rotten but it’s on the back of school discipline, which is soft. If they backchat a teacher, they get detention. Who cares about half an hour detention? I’m not advocating 25 beatings a year but I think there’s a line somewhere in the middle of the two extremes. I think you could have some old school standards within the new age values, like life everything is about a balance.

So, as you can probably tell, I was no academic. I couldn’t concentrate and hated geography and economics in particular, but I got by and have mainly happy memories of a simple school life that will be a part of me forever. I would never say that school shaped me – Mum and Dad did that – but I think it made me see that there were options in life and that they needed attention and commitment if you were going to make them work for you. Some I pulled off, others I didn’t. I guess most kids are the same.

All the AFL clubs had talent scouts and obviously St Kilda had heard about this kid at Mentone Grammar, which is just a few kilometres down the Nepean Highway from the Saints’ base at Moorabbin. They invited me to train with their Under 19s. I was a massive Hawthorn fan, but that didn’t matter. In Year 11 and 12, I played a few games for the Saints, which was pretty exciting, but I was only allowed to turn out for the club when the school team didn’t have a match. After I left school, I played a full season for the Saints. I was going okay and in one game I kicked seven goals against Hawthorn, in front of the legendary Allan Jeans. Jeans was the Hawthorn seniors’ coach, but back in 1966 he’d coached St Kilda to their one and only premiership. Although I’d been a Hawks supporter, now that I was playing for the Saints, and getting to know some of the blokes who were in the senior team, I thought, ‘I can’t barrack for Hawthorn any more – I’ve got to barrack for St Kilda now.’

I have to tell you about ‘the wall’. We’d been taking some beatings, and our Under 19s coach, Darryl Nisbet, told us, ‘From now on, however many points you lose by, we’re gonna do "the wall" that many times.’

It went like this. We all started in the centre of the ground at Moorabbin, ran out to the outside of the ground, jumped a wire fence, and then ran up a hill. At the top of the hill, there was this huge wall – maybe eight or 10 feet high. You had to grab the top of the wall, pull yourself up, then jump down onto the ground. Then you had to do the same thing again, from the other side of the wall, then run down the hill, jump the wire fence again and run back out to the centre. That was ‘one’. When we got hammered, we were there till all hours!

Another night, we got to the club, ready to go, and Darryl said, ‘Rightio, guys, no training tonight. We’re all going to run down to the Moorabbin pub and we’re going to drink six pots (that’s about three pints) and run straight back. We’ll see which of you guys throws up, which of you guys is tough, which of you guys can handle it.’

So we ran about 1.5 k’s to the pub, drank the beers as fast as we could, and then sprinted back. That was our session. Then Darryl said, ‘Rightio, boys, come back tomorrow with a better attitude.’

In 1988 I trained with the seniors a couple of times a week for three months. It was fantastic, training alongside players who’ve become greats of the game – Trevor Barker, Nicky Winmar and Tony Lockett, who in my opinion was the best player to ever play the game.

I finished the year as leading goal-kicker in the Under 19s. It was an amazing time and my footy dreams were shaping up pretty well.

Jason

Jason is nearly two years younger than me and an outstanding all-round sportsman who had a lot of bad luck with injuries. He is a true mate and I love him. We did everything together growing up. Jase could bat and to this day he claims I never got him out in the nets. I’m beginning to think it might be true. He was ‘Mr Puniverse’ until he had his growth spurt quite late – 17, I think – and whoosh, he was suddenly six foot three. This was a great moment in our house because Jase could really play football and this was the boost he needed to make the most of his ability.

He played in the seniors for St Kilda against Hawthorn in a pre-season game and, by half-time, had kicked five goals. They took him off because they didn’t want anyone else drafting him. He was told he was making the senior list, but then the club negotiated this unbelievable deal where they got three players they wanted for the following season and only had to trade one. Since you could only have 40 on the list, though, Jase missed out. It was a disgrace.

He went down to Sandringham in the VFA – the Victorian Football Association – which is the level down from the AFL. It killed him to be honest and then he picked up glandular fever, missed most of the year and was never quite the same again. It’s ridiculous how glandular fever hurt both him and Mum when they were on the brink of breaking through. He tried to make a comeback, but he shattered his leg during a match at Sandringham and didn’t think he’d ever play footy again.

Jase had the shits with everything then and went to England for 12 months to drive trucks with his mates. When he came home, the Brisbane Bears had joined the AFL and he was recruited for South-port, which, to put it in context, is like being picked for St Kilda Cricket Club before going on to play for Victoria. It was a good standard of club footy and he kicked 90-odd goals in 12 games. But he was in pain. The medics found two bulging discs in his back, and that was his sporting career over. Jase gave it everything, but it just wasn’t meant to be. Over the years I haven’t spoken to him about it much – I think it still hurts. I know how proud of me he is, but I reckon he might resent the fact that I got all the lucky breaks. There’s no doubt that, without injury, he’d have played in the AFL. He was also a good cricketer, and he played in the Under 17s for Victoria when I was nowhere near – batting at five and bowling off-spin. I was a better footballer than him as a kid, but after the growth spurt he became seriously good. We kind of reversed out.

Of course, Jase and I used to fight – like brothers do. I remember two instances vividly. As I’ve said, he was Mr Puniverse, the little weed that I picked up and threw around. I always used to say to him, ‘I’m gonna time you to run to the shop and back – I bet you can’t do it in a minute and a half each way.’ He’d be like, ‘Urrrgghh, okay.’ As he got older and stronger, though, he’d say, ‘Bloody hell, mate, you go to the shop,’ and I’d tell him, ‘No, mate, I’m the older brother, you go to the shop,’ and we’d get into a biffo. One day, he really had the shits and trapped and twisted my left arm pretty badly. I completely lost the plot and went hard at him. He just said, ‘Piss off, mate,’ and loaded up a spear gun, took aim from five metres and missed me by a foot. It hit the fence behind me. Thud! Jesus! A spear gun – I’d have been dead. Then I knew he’d had enough of me, so I left him alone for a while. (Yes, we had a spear gun at home but I’ve no idea where it came from. I promise you that’s true. If you ever meet Dad or Jason, ask them about it.)

The second time I remember fighting was after he got bigger, when he started doing weights and became massive. I mean like huge. One day he picked me up and threw me into the pool – and I was 18 years old! I climbed out and said, ‘You want some action, baby brother, let’s go.’ We got right into each other. He pinned me down with his legs, had his hands up, and I said, ‘Yeah, go on then, you haven’t got the balls,’ and bang, he smacked me in the face just as Mum walked in the house. She kicked up hell, saying, ‘You guys are brothers – grow up and sort it out,’ and she stormed off. There was blood everywhere. Jase said ‘Leave me alone’ and I did … this time forever.

Yeah, I love my brother. It might not always have been harmonious but we did everything together and had a ball. He was best man at my wedding. There was always friendly competition in the early days, but there’s only friendship and trust now. He was my agent/manager for two years, then ran my foundation for a couple more. He worked for IMG, the sports management company, and TWI, its television arm, for a while, drove trucks over here and over there, worked in real estate, and nowadays designs and sells office space, which is going great. He’s been married to Shay for 18 years and they’ve got two super kids – Tyla and Sebastian. As I say, he’s my mate and my bro and blood is thicker than water.

That’s it, the Warnes, all those years back. Let’s see what happened next.