No-One Teaches You This Bit

I WAS A Boy from Bayside in Melbourne, who’d had a simple upbringing. Summer was the beach, tennis and a bit of cricket now and again; winter was footy. Warne family holidays were mainly in September when we’d drive to Surfers Paradise in Queensland. There was a place there that had these cool, thrill-a-minute water-slides. We were either on the slides or hanging out at the beach for a week or two a year, and then we drove home. Jase and me led a pretty sheltered life, and by the time of my 18th birthday I’d been down the pub a bit with mates and chased a few girls, but I’ll bet I wouldn’t have been to more than half-a-dozen parties.

I’ve talked about my dreams – the AFL one shot down and the cricket one brought to life. Almost from nowhere I’d gone from working in factories, driving trucks, flogging pizzas and delivering beds to travelling the world and playing international cricket. It had been a pretty amazing journey; little did I know what was to come.

Old Trafford in England in 1993 changed everything. I bowled the best ball that anyone had ever seen – or so they told me. ‘The Ball of the Century’, they said, as if it was an all-time classic song, y’know, ‘Honky Tonk Women’ or ‘Bohemian Rhapsody’. There were photographers and newsos everywhere, following me close – too close – and I was thinking, ‘Hey, whoa, what’s going on?’ I had no idea about this stuff and it was massive. I was 23 years old and wherever I went it suddenly felt like there was a kid with zinc cream on his nose, trying to bowl leg-spin. A cult had appeared from nothing in the UK and I was it. No-one teaches you this bit. There is no school – you just have to trust your gut, be yourself and get a bit lucky. There are plenty of sharks out there, in it for themselves. The trick I quickly learnt was to surround myself with good people. I didn’t see myself as this new global superstar who’d bowled a miracle delivery that had everyone out of their seats, but the families and kids in the streets – or at hotels, restaurants, bars and, of course, at cricket grounds – well, they did. I didn’t want all the other stuff and I sure didn’t see it coming. It’s been an ongoing problem of mine. I don’t see the big-shot sportsman, I see the guy from Bayside, cruising with his mates, happy with a pizza and a beer.

Everywhere I went, there’d be someone who wanted a piece of me. Though it was flattering at first, it soon became hard to deal with. I’d be out with mates and people would come up and say hi, then pause, just standing there, launching into a bunch of questions about cricket. I got it, and tried to stay polite, but I wanted to relax not engage. Occasionally, I’d get ratty so they’d turn on me – ‘Big head’ or ‘Rude bastard’. I felt on show, exposed and, at times, threatened. I was beginning to see how fame was double-edged. There were even articles about the clothes I wore. ‘Warne was seen out,’ didn’t matter where, ‘dressed in ripped denim jeans.’ Really? Who cares?

At home in Melbourne, Mum and Dad’s house was the escape. In England, it was my hotel room or ‘Help, guys, stick with me tonight!’ to my team-mates. This took some digesting. I’d wanted sporting success but never considered the implications and responsibilities that came with it. People stop you for an autograph or photo and they’re meeting the headline, not the person. It’s confusing and potentially derailing.

During the two or three years that followed, I was on a roller-coaster. I took 200 wickets in that time and broke a bunch of records. The Australian team pretty much smashed everyone and life was good.

I was in glossy mags and meeting rock stars. Guys like the Rolling Stones’ tour manager would say, ‘Hey, Shane, I’m a big fan – love you, mate.’ I’d hang out backstage, before watching the show from the mixing desk, posing for a million pics and signing another million autographs. It was nuts and, though I didn’t pick up on it immediately, I was starting to feel as if I was in a pressure cooker that was increasingly close to exploding. I felt I was getting away from who I was.

It was like it wasn’t me, like I was two different people – Shane Warne the cricketer and Shane Warne the person. A lot of people spend their life trying to be in the newspaper or magazines. I’ve spent most of my life trying not to be in them. It might sound ridiculous, but that’s the way I see it. Anyway, let’s do that ball first.

The Gatting Ball

1993 Ashes. I remember sitting on the plane to England next to Merv. I said I’d watched a lot of the ’89 series when the Aussies, as underdogs, hammered the Poms. He said, ‘Mate, these are great tours: no flights, you travel round the place in a bus together drinking free beer from XXXX, the sponsors. The county games are no sweat and the Test matches have rest days on Sunday! Best of all, England are crap.’ He said it was the best tour, full stop.

I thought that sounded pretty good. We landed in England and basically went straight to Lord’s, did a press conference, had a jog, and over the next few days got rid of the cobwebs – bat, bowl, catch, throw, and then repeat it. The facilities were great and before we knew it we were off – three one-day warm-ups before the first county game at Worcestershire.

New Road, Worcester is a beautiful ground but with very short boundaries. On the outfield before the start of play, Allan Border pulled me aside and said, ‘Mate, these guys over here haven’t seen much of you, so there’s a surprise element we can exploit. I want you to bowl leg-breaks and nothing else – no topspinners, no flippers, no wrong ’uns, just leggies.’

AB added that Graeme Hick – who played for Worcestershire – had the ability to play a major part in the Test series. ‘Now is not the moment to show him your box of tricks. Switch over and round the wicket a bit if you want – not too much – and just bowl leggies to him, nothing else for now. Keep the magic up your sleeve.’

In the second innings, Hick made 187. He hit me for eight sixes. There were so many times I wanted to bowl a flipper or a wrong ’un, to show him something, but, well, AB was the boss. Geez, Hicky played well. I was bowling the leg-breaks properly, trying to fizz them, but he just kept smashing me. (Warne 23-6-122-1 in that innings!)

To be honest, I’d thought the leg-break might have been good enough for the Poms anyway, but now I was thinking this bloke Hick wasn’t a bad player, and I already knew about guys like Gooch and Gatting, so a few doubts suddenly crept in.

I was very low key through the other county matches – actually quite down in the dumps ‘These are only county games, Warney, she’ll be right on the night,’ said the other bowlers, but it sounded hollow. I felt vulnerable. By the time we got to Old Trafford for the first Test, I was like a caged animal, ripping them in the nets – leggies, wrong ’uns, flippers – and bowling for hours on end just to get back on track mentally as much as anything. As the hours and minutes ticked by to the Test, I started to overthink it. I was wondering if they’d pick Tim May instead of me because I’d been smashed by Hick at Worcester.

But AB came up to me the day before the Test and said, ‘Mate, you’re going great. They’re coming out well – you’re fizzing them.’ I said, ‘Yeah, I feel good.’

‘Great,’ AB replied, ‘because we’re unleashing you tomorrow and we are going to hammer them.’

‘Phew, okay, I’m ready to go, mate,’ I told him. ‘I’m ready.’ I really needed that. I was learning that confidence was at the heart of performance and that you couldn’t take it for granted. I had a spring in my step. When AB walked out to toss the coin, it was like, ‘How awesome is this! The huge crowd and the legend of the Ashes – love it!’ Yes, I was nervous but part of that was just wanting to get on with it, to burst out of the blocks and rip some massive leggies and show Hick and company there was more than a leg-break in this bag of tricks.

England won the toss, put us in and bowled us out on a damp pitch for 289. Mark Taylor made a fantastic hundred (he got 124) and then it was our turn to bowl.

Craig McDermott was having a horror tour, he’d hardly taken a wicket, and Mike Atherton and Gooch got off to a great start – 0/70. Just before one of the breaks, Merv knocked over Atherton, which opened the door. Gatting came in and started well. Then AB signalled for me to bowl, saying he didn’t want Gatt to settle.

I was fighting off those demons in my head. ‘To hell with it,’ I thought. ‘Get a grip, go for it, fizz these things out like you’ve never fizzed them before.’ Peter Such had taken six for England in the first innings so we knew there was plenty of spin in the pitch. All I had to do was make use of it. 

I clearly remember standing at the top of my mark and taking in deep breaths. It was chilly, which seemed to add to my nerves, and I kind of shivered in anticipation of this first Ashes moment. Gatt was on strike with Goochie at the non-striker’s end.

Goochie just stared at me the whole time, watching everything I did, trying to unsettle me. I was almost too pumped now, so I turned away from him and tried to rein back the emotion and find that – how can I say – fired-up sense of calm that served me best. It sounds daft, I know, but it’s a state that is in there somewhere, a perfect state of concentration. I can only find it if I blank out everything else. It’s hard when you’re that nervous, so I took the deep breaths and slowed everything down, which settled the shivering. Then the perfect state kicked in, like I was in a trance.

‘Right, mate, just rip this leg-break and send the England dressing-room a message that I can spin it big!’

I sensed the crowd’s excitement. More deep breaths. 

Then something inside me said, ‘You gotta go. Come on, go, mate, pull the trigger, let’s rip this.’

I remember letting go of the ball and it felt great. It couldn’t have come out any better.

Now, of course, what it does after that I can never be sure. A lot depends on how the batsman wants to play the ball and his thought process/mindset. It happens in half a second but seems to take forever. It floats and swerves and dips. I like it, really like it.

It pitches outside leg-stump and spins. Boy, does it spin! I like it more. Gatt plays half-forward, down the line of leg-stump, and misses. The ball hits the top of off.

Momentarily the world stood still. Everyone, it seemed, was frozen in shock. Gatt looked at the pitch in suspicion, like it had conned him. Then he turned for the pavilion with a bemused look and a shake of the head. We all went berserk. I was thinking, ‘You beauty – what a cherry!’ Not a bad way to start.

It was the first time that those huge Citroen replay screens (I even remember the sponsor!) were at Test grounds and we all looked up together. Heals said, ‘Mate, that is as good a ball as you will ever bowl. That is an unbelievable delivery.’

In the change-rooms at the close of play, the BBC were televising a wrap of the day and we sat there watching. Heals was still all over it: ‘Hey, boys, have a look at this, watch this …’ They replayed it 10 times from every different angle and it wasn’t until then that we realised – I realised – that it was out there, something way beyond even my expectation. As time went on, I figured that to have done that with my first ball, with the nerves and the cold – well, I’d call it a fluke. I guess it was meant to be. I never, ever did it again in my career. (On reflection, I did take a wicket with the first ball of a spell one other time – Marcus Trescothick, Trent Bridge 2005, caught at bat-pad. I strongly felt Punter should have opened the bowling with me that day. It was the fourth innings of the pivotal fourth Test. England had made us follow on and then left themselves just 129 to win. Trescothick got off to a flyer against the new nut but I should have been landing into the rough outside his off-stump straight away.) Back to the middle, where we were buzzing in a way that doesn’t happen often. It was like the ante had been upped. We dispersed and got ready for the next bloke.

Robin Smith came out. I spun a couple past his outside edge before he played a beautiful drive down the ground for four off the last ball of the over. No worries. I was feeling real good, I’d got a wicket with my first ball in England, broken the partnership, and was champing for Merv to bowl his half-dozen quickly so I could have another go.

Next over, Smith was still on strike and I thought, ‘If he fancies driving me, I’ll get it full around leg-stump, the Gatting line, and might nick him off.’ I did. I bowled another one, first ball, bang, he tried to drive, nicked it to Tubby, gone, out! Almost as good as the Gatting ball. This time it was Smith on his bike.

I had 2/4 from seven balls and I just kept going. It was overcast, cold, and as good as I ever bowled in a Test match. I loved the pitch because the ball gathered pace and turned quickly. Merv knocked Hick over for 34 and 22 and then, in the next Test match, took it upon himself to barrage him – verbally and physically. After a couple of games, Hick was dropped; Gatting too. Gooch lost the captaincy. It turned square again in the fifth Test at Edgbaston, where me and Maysey picked up five each. The pitches played into our hands. We swarmed all over the Poms.

Captaincy is everything. Get it right and you release your players; get it wrong and you shackle them. AB released me in Sri Lanka and then in England in 1993. The rest became a little piece of cricketing history.

‘Simmo’ and the Work Ethic

I’ve talked a lot about Allan Border but not much about Bob Simpson and the role he played in my development. Simmo formed an outstanding opening partnership for Australia with Bill Lawry in the 1960s, was the best slip fielder anyone around back then had seen, bailed out the ACB during World Series Cricket by coming out of retirement to play his first Test in a decade, and became the Australian coach in 1986. That’s a good CV. In my view, he was the best coach Australia ever had and I had too.

I was always a hard worker when it came to cricket training. The failed footy audition inspired that. In hindsight, I didn’t train hard enough at footy. I was a good mark and had a good kick, but my fitness wasn’t great. I was just lazy. I relied on my talent in the junior age groups, but after the switch to play at senior level I just didn’t work hard enough to be stronger, fitter and improve. That’s the key to any player in any sport – you must improve as your career goes on! It means you care. When I latched onto cricket, I put in the hard yards. I listened, watched and learnt. I’m perceptive when it comes to sport and those who play it, and I learn quickly. I can fast-track. I accept I have plenty of weaknesses but this isn’t one of them. I wasn’t going to fail twice.

Ian Chappell told me to watch captains, so I never took my eye off Allan Border or, later, Mark Taylor. Chappelli said, ‘Always put yourself in the captain’s shoes and think what you would do next.’ I was bowling for hours and hours in the nets to different players and in different conditions. The more games I played, the more experience I was getting and the more I was getting a feel for captaincy. Once your place is secure, you play with a greater freedom. It’s a great feeling that you know you’re going to play the next game. You are more prepared to take a risk or experiment, try the impossible – in real terms you lose the fear of failure. We sometimes forget what it’s like – and how hard it is – for younger players playing for their spot. I soon learnt how the game worked and how I could influence it. I took on board Terry Jenner’s stuff about how a batsman walks to the crease, how he grips his bat, how he takes guard and studies the field – those detailed things that you start to build a kind of mental dossier from. Is this bloke really so confident? Or is it bravado? I wanted to know what he had deep down and whether it was enough to cope with the moment and with me.

I found these intricacies really made me tick. I absorbed the way they affected the battle, which I loved, and felt how the challenges pumped electricity through my veins. I tried to change the tempo of matches, accelerating momentum or, at times, slowing it right down. And I always looked to do the very thing the opposition didn’t want me to do.

Simmo pushed me even harder than I was pushing myself. Bowl, bowl, bowl; bat, bat, bat – hour upon hour. Then with Tubby, AB and ‘Junior’ – Mark Waugh – he’d make us catch, catch, catch, and then catch, catch, catch again. It’s like anything: once you see the improvement, you want more. The worst thing is to put in the hours and not see any improvement – like if you go to the gym, sweat your balls off, and at the end of it your muscles look the same. So what happens? You don’t go to the gym no more!

But I was showing results. I was getting better, and better still. I was taking plenty of wickets, making a few useful runs and holding on to catches. (Here’s a couple of stats for the people who are into them. I have the most Test runs without a hundred and there are only two players ever, of which I’m one, to take 300 or more wickets, make 3000 or more runs and have 100 catches or more – the other is Ian Botham.) I ensured my fitness stayed good, my physio was disciplined and my shoulders and arm stayed strong. I was doing cricket-specific training, getting massages most days and even eating healthier. I was enjoying success. Remember, a few years earlier I’d been told I wasn’t good enough so my whole drive was ‘Yes, I am good enough and I’ll prove it to myself and to the world.’ I was like a steam train, nothing was going to stop me. I’ve departed a bit from Simmo here and I’ll be back to him in just a minute. First, I want to give you an example of the fever that had overtaken me. The early problems any leg-spinner faces are accuracy and consistency: it’s complex and it’s hard work. That’s why so many kids have a crack and give it up; that, and the coaches and captains who don’t get it. I came to it relatively late which might have helped, actually. I knew a bit more and figured, ‘Right, I’ve got to be more accurate than anyone, ever.’ Hard graft can achieve that, which means hours, days, months.

In the nets I put an old ball, or a handkerchief, on the spot where a good legbreak should pitch and then I bowled at it until I hit it more often than not. Most sessions I would tell myself I had to hit the ball x times before I can go! That was as much a mental thing, as well as improving my skill. That’s not easy, I promise you. After a while, I hit it lots. So then I moved the ball, or the handkerchief, a fraction left or right or fuller or shorter and started again. Then I’d position it for a left-hander and do the same. And that was just the leg-break. There was the slider, the wrong ’un and the flipper too. The process could take 40 minutes or four hours. If I achieved my target in 40 minutes, I’d go home. If not, I’d keep going until I did. I was mainly on my own, often bowling two to three hundred balls per session, but I never left a session beaten. Back to Simmo, and once I got into the Australian side, he helped me out – fielding balls and making suggestions. He respected my work ethic and began to relate his own experience to the match situations I’d be facing. It was Simmo who taught me that bowling round the wicket could be a weapon to both left and right-handers. I was 12th man for a Test in Perth and he asked if I’d ever thought of bowling round the wicket. I said it was bloody hard around there, because of the lines, angles and body shape at delivery. Nah, he said, it was easy, and that I’d take a heap of wickets from round there once I understood the basics.

I said, ‘Why go through all that? I’m doing okay from over the wicket, aren’t I?’

‘You have to change the angles to right-handers,’ he said, ‘especially when it’s not turning much. And, of course, it’s perfect against left-handers once the pitch starts to deteriorate.’

I thought about it a bit and then said that if someone bowled round the wicket to me, I’d smash them miles.

He said, ‘Oh, is that right?’

Anyway, the day went on and at the close of play, I fixed all the drinks for the guys. Out of nowhere, Bob said, ‘Shane, put your pads on, we’re going to the nets and I’m going to bowl at you from round the wicket.’ Simmo was pretty good by the way. He knocked me over about five times, easy, so then I got curious. ‘Tell me more,’ I said. We talked about the angles, not just to attack the batsmen, but more importantly the angles that I needed to align myself at delivery: so, my approach to the crease, shoulder position and hip drive.

I did okay. I asked TJ about it, and he said, ‘Yeah, it could be good but be careful of getting too round-arm in delivery or of just "putting it there". You’ve still got to bowl it.’

I was really curious now and started to practise it a lot. The rough outside the right-hander’s off-stump came into play big time and the options gave me opportunities I’d never considered. I could play tricks with batsmen’s minds. If you’re batting and you see a ball explode out of the rough – even if you’re just kicking it away – it stays in your head. I thought, ‘I can work with this – thanks, Bob.’ Not that it’s as easy as it might sound to get right. Murali never felt comfortable bowling round the wicket; quite a few spinners I know didn’t. Bob Simpson was so good because he challenged us to get better every day. During the 1993 Ashes tour, we dropped a few catches in the slips in an early county game. Practice had got a bit lazy, I reckon. Me, Mark Taylor, Mark Waugh and AB were just sort of catching, without concentrating on a result from the session. Junior was trying to take them one handed and that sort of stuff, like only he could. Simmo was real angry. ‘Right, you blokes aren’t catching too well and you’re not taking it seriously either, so you’re going to nick some to me and I’m going to show you how to do it.’ He threw his bat down and came into the slips.

‘You’ve got to get your weight right. Go on, throw full on and nick it to me,’ he said. He caught everything, every one, anywhere, and we went, ‘Wow.’ We’d heard about him but we hadn’t seen it for ourselves. He reinforced some tips like the weight on the inside of the feet. Then he explained how the head and body should move with the line of the ball and how opening up the left or right foot a touch allowed that to happen. ‘In turn,’ he said, ‘this will allow you to ride the pace of the ball and give with your hands, keeping them soft. Too many people just reach to the line of the ball and their hands snatch at it, or they stay static with hard hands and expect hand/eye instinct to take over. If you get the footwork right and go with this flowing motion it becomes a whole lot easier.’ Brilliant. We listened and we learnt.

So Bob could catch in the slips and bowl leg-spin pretty well. He could bat, of course, was brilliant on the philosophies of building an innings, combating an opponent and even more brilliant on running between the wickets. His knowledge of the game was not only very good but very simply explained and easy to understand. He could show us stuff, not lecture us like a school teacher, and he improved our thinking and our skills. It was proper cricket coaching, and for us young kids, he was a game-changer. We’d talk about the game for hours with him; we were very lucky to have Simmo.