TJ’s Place – March 1992

I STOPPED OFF at some Adelaide drive-through bottle store and bought a slab of beer, having driven fast from Melbourne, on a whim, and been done by the cops for speeding in a small town called Keith, 220 kilometres short of Adelaide. I’d traded in the TC Cortina for a Nissan Vector with a few bucks from my various jobs and an early contract with the Australian Cricket Board worth three grand. There was no plan for a new car but I’d been on the Nepean Highway driving home one afternoon and on the corner of the big junction near Brighton was a showroom with this gleaming Pulsar Vector, white with white wheels. It was up on a shiny steel rack and looked very cool. I wanted that car! I got 1200 bucks for the Cortina and Dad lent me a grand. The rest was me. I bought a mobile phone, the big brick that somehow fitted in the car in those days, hooked it all up and took off for Adelaide, music on loud and calling all my mates. The long road to South Australia flew by, until that flashing light in the mirror, the inquisition, the fine and the demerit points.

I knew the address and, mid-afternoon on a hot late-summer day, I knocked on Terry Jenner’s door. He looked pretty shocked. I told him that the idea of a life in football had truly passed me by and that cricket was now the dream. The taste of Test cricket, the thrill of state cricket and the challenge of finding a new path forward in my life had got hold of me. ‘I want to learn. The passion is bubbling and I’ll do whatever it takes.’

TJ gave it to me. He just ripped into me like you wouldn’t believe. ‘What the hell?’ he said. ‘You’re overweight – fat, actually. You’ve got no discipline and you think you’re better than you are. You didn’t deserve to play for Australia. Some guys used to dominate Shield cricket and never got picked. Others – me for one – would get a game here and there, and get binned. You’ve got some amazing talent, but I question your commitment. You got a game for Australia because there’s no-one else out there right now. You’re a lucky boy alright, but you’re not that good. Not yet, anyway, although you could be. So let’s get serious. Put the beers back in the car, all two dozen of them, and tomorrow take ’em back to the bottle store. While you work with me, there are no beers. Actually, put them in my fridge for another time.’

And that was the point when I thought, ‘Right, no-one has ever spoken to me like that before. I’m in.’ Mind you, Simon O’Donnell had come close. Initially, in the summer of 1991/92 I hadn’t secured a regular place in the Victorian state side and received an offer from New South Wales via Steve Waugh, who was keen for me to join the Blues. I thought about it very seriously but was put in my place, first by Darren ‘Chuck’ Berry who walked me round the Albert Ground – where the Victorian team trained – and told me to get my act together, and then Scuba, who went a stage further. In short, he had me up against a wall and called me a weak bastard for not backing myself in Victoria. He said, ‘You can piss off to NSW if you like, but you’re going for the wrong reasons, and, mark my words, mate, you’ll regret it.’ Mum and Dad helped convince me to stay too, so that was that. Four people I rated highly all making it clear!

So, I backed myself to be better than the others in Victoria – better than blokes like Peter McIntyre and Paul Jackson. ‘Toughen up,’ I thought, ‘and get into this Victorian cricket team.’ Which I did, but that was no longer my limit: I suddenly wanted more in a way I had never, ever felt before. This was more than my goal, or an ambition now, it was even more than a desire – it had become a form of desperation and I was determined to do whatever it took to make it and not fail. The thing was that I didn’t know how to manage it. Thankfully, Terry Jenner did. Bring on the instigator.

‘Okay, mate, can we start tomorrow?’ I asked him.

He said, ‘No way, Shane – we start now, here. Let’s talk.’

That’s what we did until midnight – about everything that had happened to me so far, from club cricket and the Academy to playing for Australia, and everything we needed to do going forward. About the history of the game, about the greats and their achievements, about pitches and places and umpires and the laws and captaincy and fielding positions. Then we crashed out and slept till the sun came up and my new life started.

I climbed off the couch and, for the first time since I’d started smoking full-on when I was 16, I didn’t light a cigarette that morning. Then I went for a long, hard run. Well, sort of. It didn’t turn out that long or that far. Geez, I was unfit. When I got back TJ was awake and he said, ‘Oh, right, you’ve been for a run – that’s progress already.’

Then we sat down and he listed a bunch of former players, most I hadn’t heard of and the rest I didn’t know much about. He asked me a heap of questions about them. I was clueless. So TJ made me watch old footage of a lot of the greats – people like Arthur Mailey and Clarrie Grimmett. He said, ‘Test cricket didn’t start in 1991/92 when you got a game, mate, we’ve got 120 years to catch up on.’

I’d driven from Melbourne to Terry Jenner’s house in Adelaide with the idea of surprising him and spending a couple of days picking his brains. I stayed for six weeks. The gist of our first conversations and practical experiments was this. ‘Shane, you bowl nicely and rip your leg-spinners, you bowl your wrong ’uns and your straight ones and you’ve got an unbelievable flipper. You can also catch well and bat too. You’ve got the toys, mate, but you don’t know how to use them. In other words, you don’t know how to get people out.’

I said, ‘What do you mean?’

‘You need to learn what, when and why.’

‘I don’t understand.’

‘What you are bowling, when you are bowling it and why you are bowling it.’

‘Yes, I sort of get that.’

‘You don’t just bowl a wrong ’un because you haven’t bowled one for 10 balls, and you don’t bowl a wrong ’un because a new batsman comes in and you want to make him look a fool. You don’t bowl a flipper because you haven’t bowled one for two overs. For a flipper to really work, you have to plan its disguise, and to do that you have to set up the batsman with a faster leg-break. The idea is to push the batsman back and then strike, for LBW or bowled. You want them looking to cut or pull. In other words you want them back in the crease and it takes time, patience and strategy to push them back. Big leg-break, small leg-break, any of the varieties – think tactics and strategy.’

There was more, much more. ‘At the moment, there are a few things you haven’t got. Like you haven’t really got a top-spinner, which is an over-spinner that people mistake for a wrong ’un. You haven’t got a high-bouncing leggie. You haven’t got the mastery of side-spin and over-spin yet. You’ve got a great natural leggie, although it needs to be more consistent; you have a decent wrong ’un and an outstanding flipper, but you need that over-spinner and a slider, and you need to conquer the various types of delivery and levels of spin. Above all, you’ll need to learn patience in order to execute these plans.’

I was salivating now, with a ball in my hand, ripping it from one hand to the other. ‘How, how, how, TJ?’ I was thinking. ‘I wanna know!’ I realised we had lots to do. I asked Terry to tell me a bit more about what, when and why. ‘I’ll repeat the earlier question,’ he said. ‘Ask yourself what you’re bowling, when you’re going to bowl it and why.’

‘Okay,’ I said, ‘let’s start with a "what". Let’s say I’m trying to nick them off, caught keeper or slip.’

‘Right,’ he said, ‘are you bowling wide of the crease or tight to the stumps? How are you setting the guy up? How does he grip the bat? Where is he most likely to attack you?’

‘I don’t know,’ I admitted.

‘Good, that’s a start – you don’t think you know it all. So let’s go to work on why you bowl certain deliveries, when you’re going to bowl them and how we can disguise them. And let’s work out an over-spinner. That’s a month of education and then years of practice. Okay with you?’ ‘Yep. Cool,’ I said.

First up, I figured I better get fitter, so I got up and ran every morning, like Forrest Gump. Just ran and ran. I never once had a fag before I went on a run. And I completely gave up alcohol. When I first knocked on Terry’s door, I was 93 kilograms; a month later I was less than 85. I went to Merv Hughes’ wedding during that time, drank water and left earlyish.

Two days later I was back. Terry taught me how to bowl close to the stumps and wide of the crease; how to bowl one middle and leg, then middle stump, then off-stump; how to bowl outside off-stump, straight and sucker wide too; how to drag them across the crease and how to get them stuck where they were on the crease. How to repeat the leg-break, ball after ball, from these different angles, and how and when to use the wrong ’un, or googly as it’s usually known overseas. I then thought about what to put in my armoury regarding what worked for me. That’s the thing with advice. Listen to it all, and work out for yourself whether it’s good for you or not.

I actually learnt how to bowl different wrong ’uns – Richie Benaud showed me one with an orange in an airport lounge. It was a beauty. My wrong ’un was good until 1998 when I did my shoulder. I never really got it back so good after that.

Above all, I worked on a plan. You have to have a plan for every batsman, Terry insisted, to quickly work out where his strengths and weaknesses are. There was no real technology for analysis in those days, so you had to watch and listen and use your brain. After computers came in, I still liked instinct and working out the mental state of a player. No computer can tell you that. One day, Terry blindfolded me and I bowled without the distraction of a target but in search of rhythm and feel. Then, straight after removing the blindfold, I’d bowl at a target – a handkerchief, say – and expect to hit it more often than not. Man, I was in the zone: so, so focused. I’ve never been that focused in my life. I was committed to learning, I was disciplined, I hardly smoked, I slept great and was overwhelmed by determination. Getting seriously fit felt fantastic. I wanted to be the best I could ever imagine being and never again wanted to hear the words that had haunted me: ‘You’re not good enough.’

We spent a lot of time back at the Academy, where Rod Marsh was now in charge. A year on, it was a totally different place. Rod was terrific, giving me a lot of his time even though he had other responsibilities. He allowed me all the Academy facilities and all the time in the world. Terry and I bowled for three to four hours a day, maybe more. The routine was run, eat, morning net session, train, lunch, and back for an afternoon session every day. I was completing the beep test at 13.5, pool sessions, weights, the lot. I trained my arse off. I’ve never trained harder before or since and climbed on the scales one day to read 79 kilos. 

Awesome!

Soon after, I was picked to tour Sri Lanka in August with the Australian team. We had precious little time to get it right. Terry said, ‘They’ve basically gifted you this tour – you don’t deserve it yet.’ And then he added, ‘But when you get there, Allan Border and the guys are going to go, "Wow, this guy is really up for it."’

I said, ‘TJ, I’m not going to fail at cricket. I failed at footy and had to read a letter that left me completely shattered. I’ve delivered beds and pizzas and didn’t like it much. I’m going to make this happen, I promise you.’

The Sri Lankan Miracle – August 1992

Sri Lanka was exciting for me. It was the chance to prove to myself and to others how far I’d come. From when the guys had last seen me in early January, when I was 99 kilograms and generally down in the dumps, to Sri Lanka in August when I was 79 kilos and ripping them, I’d become a very different cricketer. Better than that, I’d begun to understand what I was doing.

Sri Lanka is a beautiful country but, at the time, was torn apart by civil war. This was their first home Test series since a horrific bomb blast in Colombo in 1987. Security was tight, but to be honest I hardly noticed. I was like a kid on Christmas Eve – so excited. I bowled for hours in the nets on days so hot and humid that Tony Dodemaide, a surprise selection ahead of Merv Hughes, lost 5 kilograms in a morning session. Sweat soaked through his socks and poured out of a hole he’d cut in his boots to relieve pressure on an injured big toe. I bowled for hours to AB because he was one guy who always treated a net like a game. ‘What’s your field?’ he’d say, and off we’d go. These sessions became mini-Tests between us. He was like, ‘You’re not getting me out,’ and I’m not sure I ever did. The trick at a net session or practice is to recreate, as near as possible, the intensity of a match and work daily on an improvement in your game, however small. It isn’t easy, but if your team can do that more often than not, that’s when the magic happens – along with laughter and fun afterwards. I did exactly that and showed AB that I was bowling well. Occasionally the ball slipped out of my hand because of the sweat pouring down my forearms and AB suggested gripping it with the seam up, like a quick bowler, to get some purchase. He figured if I didn’t know what would happen to it, well, the same might apply to the batsman. I tried. It didn’t work. So we got to the first Test match and I was picked. Though Australia had beaten Sri Lanka in a Test in Kandy in 1983, it was the only game we’d won anywhere in Asia since 1969 – Bill Lawry’s successful tour of India. It was an intense match in many ways. We didn’t get enough first up – 256, thanks to Ian Healy, who dragged us back into it. Then Romesh Kaluwitharana smashed 132 not out on debut. They all hammered us, making 8/547 declared. We responded well in the second innings with well over 400 and left them 181 to win. Not a difficult target, but not dead easy either.

You have to start well in a low chase. They did. 0/76; 2/127, and then Aravinda de Silva ran down to smack Craig McDermott over his head. It was a high ball, really high. AB sprinted back, whipped his sunnies and hat off, dived horizontally and took this unbelievable running catch. 3/127 – Aravinda gone. Now they needed 54 with seven wickets in the shed. Asanka Gurusinha was playing really well in a heated contest with Greg Matthews, who was bowling beautifully.

At the other end, I bowled a rubbish over and went for nine. Aarrgghh! In the first innings, Arjuna Ranatunga had got into me, while making a typically resilient hundred. Arjuna had a habit of doing my head in. He was cocky and confrontational and we never saw eye to eye – can’t imagine why! I’d finished that innings with 0/107 in 22 overs. ‘Help me, Lord,’ I thought, ‘0/107 is no better than Sydney or Adelaide against India.’ So, at tea, during the second innings, I retreated into myself. ‘Jesus, I’ve done all this work, trained my arse off and I’m still getting hammered. Maybe cricket isn’t my go.’ It sounds stupid, I know, but the game gets to you pretty quick. I was totally disheartened.

Allan Border sensed something, saw me on the balcony having a smoke, and came and sat next to me. ‘Mate, you’re bowling bloody well,’ he said. ‘You’ve done the hard yards so keep believing, stay patient – trust me, it will happen.’ I was like, ‘Yeah, thanks, AB.’ I couldn’t help but wonder if he was just saying that. I doubted he truly believed what he was telling me. One thing, though, I respected him for trying and at least I knew he cared.

Anyway, ‘Mo’ Matthews chipped away and the Sri Lankans were six down, still needing 34 to win, when my cricket career took a dramatic turn. AB signalled down to fine leg and shouted, ‘Next over, Warney!’ ‘Oh no, no, no, no, you can’t be serious,’ I thought. ‘This could be done and dusted in a couple of overs, AB. You can’t do this to me, not now, not with so much at stake. I could cost us the match.’ But I kept my outward emotions in check and began to convince myself that, actually, now was as good a time as any.

I bowled a maiden – I’d never concentrated so hard in my life. I thought, ‘We’re still in this. We haven’t lost yet. No way.’ Then Mo took his fourth wicket, an LBW that we were long overdue. Seven down, 34 to win. What you don’t fully appreciate, until you’ve played a bit, is that your opponents are under severe pressure too. Aravinda had played a shocking shot – the one caught by AB – having played the same shot an over before and got away with it by an inch or two – a finger-tipper, again to AB. Yes, the guys waiting in the rooms to bat are nervous, or worse, and when they see their star players make mistakes, they begin to imagine hand-grenades themselves. You learn to trade on that and to back yourself to handle the pressure better than the other bloke. And you can only think like that once you’ve done it a few times when the game is there to be won. It’s amazing that when you reach that point, the opposition starts to think you’ll do it when the game is in the balance. That’s how you create an aura out on the ground and off the pitch too – it’s an innerconfidence. It’s also that something that some players have that you can’t put your finger on. But back then …

Mo, who was always supportive and good to me, was shouting, ‘C’mon, Suicide’ (his nickname for me, after the INXS song, ‘Suicide Blonde’). AB was, like, possessed – you almost didn’t dare let him down – and it was in situations like this that he demanded courage and concentration.

Oh Jeeeesus … I was nervous, but I just tried to stay focused. Then, a breakthrough. Mark Waugh took a catch off me to dismiss Pramodya Wickramasinghe. My second Test wicket. Yes! Dean Jones came up to me and said, ‘Well done, mate, your average just came down to 160.’ I think it was meant to be a joke, at least I hope it was. Good one, Deano.

The match was so tight now. The wicket gave us the scent of victory and that’s the point when it got even more intense out there. I was thinking, ‘Holy shit!’ Honestly, I could hardly talk. I was elsewhere, gasping. Then ‘Junior’ caught another – Don Anurasiri. Sri Lanka were nine down and imploding. End of over.

Next one, Mo went for two boundaries – strong sweeps by the Guru. Seventeen to win. One ball of Mo’s over left and the Guru wanted to steal the strike, but Ranjith Madurasinghe turned him down at the non-striker’s end. Me to  bowl. Madurasinghe looked terrified and couldn’t help himself: he wound up, mishitting the leg-break high but nowhere. Mo circled underneath it and hung on. Australia win! By 16. The guys go crazy. Me too. I’d taken 3/11 – the last three – without conceding a run. There was joy everywhere, not least on AB’s face. In the dressing-room, led by David Boon, we belted out ‘Underneath the Southern Cross’, our victory song. We were later to hear that next door, in the Sri Lanka room, it was like someone had died. ‘Kalu’ was quoted as saying he felt stabbed in the chest with a knife over and over again. In our dressing-room, AB called it ‘The greatest heist since the Great Train Robbery’. Sri Lanka had lost eight wickets for 37. If it had been on TV in Australia it would be remembered as one of the great Test matches. That team was Mark Taylor, Tom Moody, David Boon, Mark Waugh, Dean Jones, Allan Border, Greg Matthews, Ian Healy, Shane Warne, Craig McDermott and Mike Whitney. I contributed to the win and sensed the relief. It’s hard to explain exactly how good it was to feel I belonged; or if not quite belonged, that I didn’t let anyone down.

I’m indebted to AB for having the confidence to throw me the ball. I’ll never  forget that. It was also great captaincy and leadership. God I love that man. He did so much for me over the years, and he was a great leader for sure, who is nowadays regarded as the grandad of Australian cricket. All of us who played under him listened and learnt. He toughened us up and set us on a straight road. The part AB has played in our game has been truly exceptional. I missed the second Test match with a weird foot thing called Plantar fasciitis. It was unbelievably painful – I couldn’t walk. I played the third Test but most of it was a washout. So that was the series over.

I felt pretty good about my game right then and started the 1992/93 summer in Australia smashing it in Shield cricket with both bat and ball. However, I wasn’t picked for the first Test against West Indies in Brisbane. We should have won the game but couldn’t bowl them out on the last day. At the press conference, Allan Border said we’d have won if Shane Warne had played. So, after making 69 with the bat and taking six-for against WA at the Junction I got picked Boxing Day!

Boxing Day for the First Time – December 1992

In the Boxing Day Test, I took 1/65 in the first innings. That got people talking: ‘This Warne isn’t much good.’ Remember Australians had only seen me in Sydney and Adelaide against India previously. Sri Lanka hadn’t been televised. The frustration that my home town wasn’t seeing the best of me turned into motivation. I came out second innings and took 7/52 – against Haynes, Hooper, Lara, Richardson; all those guys in the team that was still rated number one in the world. I knocked them over with my flipper – the one to Richie Richardson was about the best I ever bowled. Everything clicked, it felt like magic. Richie had come down to a wrong ’un and said afterwards, ‘Hey, man, was that the wrong one?!’ I said, ‘Yeah, watch out for it, Richie,’ and then knocked him over with the flipper next ball! Merv took the last catch and the party began. When I’d finished my days with TJ and Rod Marsh in Adelaide, I’d given them both a bottle of red wine to thank them for their help. They said they’d open them at an appropriate time, like after Warne took some wickets! Rod rang the MCG dressing-room after that victory and said he was at home drinking the red I’d given him. It was wonderful of him to call. I called TJ to see if he’d opened one too. ‘Still not the time, mate,’ he said, ‘but great job, well done.’ I said ‘Okay, no worries.’

I remember Greg Matthews running out to get my dad to celebrate with us in the rooms and I got a fun picture of him and me having a beer with Merv, who threw most of it all over us. Ian ‘Molly’ Meldrum came in too. He’d been the host of the TV music show Countdown and was a legend in Australia – as big as Michael Parkinson in England. He loved his sport. ‘Mate, that was one of the best days,’ he said. ‘I’ve never seen a leg-spinner bowl like that, and against the West Indies – can you believe it? It was unreal. Love ya, Warney.’ Boony sang the team song with unbelievable passion and we all just went berserk. It was an awesome night. I woke up the next day thinking, ‘If I bowl like that, I’m good enough. Yes, I’m ready to go and watch me fucking go.’ That was my first night back on the beer proper. I’d worked so hard – I’d drunk water at Merv’s wedding, trained, practised, starved myself. So I got flying drunk and was nothing more than a statistic the next day. But from then on – certainly for the rest of that series – I was okay with it and took things easy. The booze didn’t matter, the performances did.

We drew in Sydney over the New Year, the match that Brian Lara played his great innings of 277. I’ve said it before and I’ll say it again: if we hadn’t run him out, we’d have never got him out. Our 500 played their 600 – a batting deck! He tells a good story about naming his daughter Sydney after that innings. Then he pauses and adds, ‘Lucky I didn’t make 277 in Lahore!’

All of this meant we were one up going into Adelaide in late January. It’s perhaps the biggest disappointment of my cricket life that we lost that incredible Test match by one run. 2006 against England became known as ‘Amazing Adelaide’, but 1993 came close to claiming that title. We were the ones chasing this time, just 186 to win. It was our dressing-room’s turn to be so nervous, to feel that pressure I talked about, and we could barely watch as Curtly Ambrose, Courtney Walsh and Ian Bishop got stuck into us. What a match it was! In the end those great fast bowlers were just too good.

I only bowled eight overs in the whole game; Tim May bowled 22 and took seven wickets. ‘Maysey’ was a ripper – top bloke, top bowler. We loved operating together – he was my favourite spinner to bowl with – and we certainly complemented each other. I’d bet our record re wickets taken and Test matches won is as good as anyone’s.

He came within a whisker of getting us over the line with the bat, finishing unbeaten on 42 when Craig McDermott was caught at the wicket off Courtney Walsh. The margin was one run! That’s all, one. So near, so far. Some game, this Test cricket. We all remember the television footage of our viewing gallery when McDermott was given out. Border and his boys were not happy. Just a scratch on the glove of a steepling ball at ‘Billy’s head. Cruel. But it was brilliant by Walsh, who was a hugely respected cricketer. And a brave and great decision by the umpire Darrell Hair.

We went to Perth with the series to play for, and Curtly Ambrose took 7/1 on a minefield. From 0/24 with the new nut, he finished with 7/25 – the most lethal spell of fast bowling I’ve ever seen. The game was over in two days basically. The pitch was green and rock hard; good-length balls flew past and over our heads. They’d replaced Kenny Benjamin with Anderson Cummins – so it was Ambrose, Bishop, Walsh and this guy Cummins, who was no slouch. I mean, please. We had … no chance, as the scores prove. We lost the match by an innings and the series 2–1. The legend of the modern-day West Indians lived on. By now, I really felt I belonged. After the West Indies tour, we went straight to New Zealand, where I took 17 wickets in three matches at an average of 15 each. It had been an extraordinary year. From setting off to TJ’s place in Adelaide to the final Test of the 1992/93 summer in Auckland, my life had changed beyond all recognition. There had been something in the air alright. By this point, some important and influential people had placed a lot of faith in me. First up was TJ, for the detailed technical stuff, the mental side and the tactics – plus his unwavering belief that I had it in me to be something special. TJ treated me like a son and I responded like we were family. Nothing was left uncovered.

Rod Marsh was a big influence too, and because Rod, TJ and Ian Chappell were great mates, the four of us spent a lot of time together. Rod was good on discipline and cricket common-sense. He helped me think clearly.

Chappelli has this amazing cricket brain and I reckon he must be one of the two or three greatest captains of all time. Who are the candidates? Douglas Jardine, of course, for what he achieved against Bradman and having the courage to change the game’s parameters; Sir Frank Worrell, definitely, for the image he gave cricket and the flair with which his team played the game; Richie Benaud, for imagination, flair and style, and … Ian Chappell, in my view.

I’ve listened to him talking cricket for a long time now and he makes more sense than anyone. He taught me so much about the tactical side of the game, about strategy, about getting the best out of players and about loyalty to them – the aspects of the job that matter most. He sees inside the game and inside the minds of all of us who play it, even from 150 metres away in the commentary box, and he continues to push for the things that matter most – attacking cricket and good pitches that give an equal chance to batsman and bowler. I’ve spoken to a lot of former captains over these past 30 years and I’ve learnt more from Chappelli than anyone.

I remember having breakfast with him around the time I was at the Academy and thinking, ‘Wow, this guy is good.’ One particular thing he said has always stuck with me: ‘Know yourself.’ When people ask me about their own game these days, I add to that, ‘Never pretend to be something you’re not. Be straight up and you’ll be respected for it.’

Chappelli introduced me to Bill O’Reilly in a bar in Perth. I had a couple of minutes with him, in passing. He had a hat on – I particularly remember that – and he said it was nice to meet me and that I should keep up the good work. We didn’t talk for long, but he was full of encouragement. Next day I read an article by him saying he’d watched a young leg-spinner who was going to have a huge future. Stick with him, the article said, because it was fantastic to see leg-spin back in the game. Chappelli says he was a brilliant observer of the game. I have to agree!

There have been a few other important influences. Dad, of course, who always encouraged me and was there every day; Shaun Graf, who did a lot for me at St Kilda and for the Vics; and Simon O’Donnell, who shoved me up against that wall. Good job, Scuba! Then there are Jack Potter, Jimmy Higgs, Bob Paulsen – all good leggies – and Laurie Sawle, the chairman of selectors who backed me without much to go on.

Growing up, I followed Abdul Qadir. I played and trained with Peter Sleep. I watched Bob Holland take five wickets at Lord’s. I remember Kerry O’Keeffe’s hop and I can picture Jim Higgs, who had a big drag, with a nice wrong ’un and a big-spinning leggie. There was no-one, though, that I specifically emulated or copied. For sure, me and Jason would impersonate Qadir in the backyard, at the top of his mark, giving it the arm twirls and then the leap and bound. Magic bowler, that guy, but I didn’t copy his approach or action. In fact, I tried to slow my whole process down: to measure it and time it, to create drama, precision, power and aggression.

We were all captivated by Richie Benaud presenting the cricket on television and with TJ I’d watched film of him bowling. He passed on to me what O’Reilly had told him: learn to land six leg-breaks perfectly. It’ll take you three years to do it, Richie said. Apparently, he later said that I did it in two, which was why I was better than the other guys. I don’t know if that’s true or not, but let’s say it is. Thanks, Rich.

After my first finger operation in 1996, I lost the feel for the leg-break, and though TJ was sure it was coming out right I knew I had more to do than we first realised. The feeling of the ball coming out of the hand – the use of the fourth finger on the right hand, next to the little finger – that’s the key to the whole thing. I used to spin off that knuckle, fizzing the ball in a way that alarmed most batsmen. To be honest, I didn’t get that back for a while, and I got by through experience and a bit of bluff and bling.

Richie had commentated on the last game of the summer before we left for the World Cup on the subcontinent and he’d rung Austin Robertson – my manager at the time – to tell ‘Ocker’ that he’d seen something in my action that he wanted to talk to me about. Ock gave me a number to call Richie in France.

I’d been lucky enough to go out to dinner with Richie and his wife, Daphne, a couple of times, so we got to know each other well enough. Remember, Richie was like the messiah, the conscience for all things cricket, and we loved him. If he wanted a chat it was cool by me.

That night, I dialled the number and a familiar voice said ‘Hello, Benaud residence.’

‘Oh, g’day, Richie, it’s Shane Warne here, mate. Ock said to ring you.’ The voice said, ‘No, this isn’t Richie but I’ll get him for you.’ I said ‘Really? Okay, thanks.’

And it was like three, two, one – ‘Hello, who’s calling?’

‘It’s Shane Warne, Richie. Ock said to call.’

‘Oh, g’day, Shane …’

It was like Richie had pretended to be the butler! Anyway, he couldn’t help re the finger injury – he just said bowl as many balls as you can and the feel will come. Then he talked about the gather, just before the final delivery stride. He said, ‘You haven’t got a full arc on your gather. You’re sort of going from shoulder height, which limits the arc and puts pressure on the follow-through. Get a fuller arc going again, like you used to. It’ll give you better shape on the ball, allowing you to bowl it "up" more.’

It made great sense. I said, ‘Thanks very much, Richie, I really appreciate your input.’

He said, ‘Anytime,’ and added, ‘I won’t come and trouble you, Shane, but if you ever have a question, don’t be afraid to ask.’ Then it was ‘Goodbye and go well’ and the phone hung up. Brilliant. I wondered if the butler then served breakfast to Daphne.

Richie was spot on. The advice worked well and I soon got a rhythm going. The best way I can explain it is to say that it’s like a golfer not making a full shoulder turn and take-away of the club. Once I got a full arc, everything slotted into place.

I bowled a lot in the nets, got my feel back soon enough and had a good World Cup, especially in the semi-final against the West Indies. We were gone for all money until I knocked over two or three guys in the middle-order – the flipper was coming out great – and we were back in the game. Damien Fleming came on at the end and bowled superbly under pressure. West Indies had been 2/165 chasing 208 and bombed – all out 202. We won by five. A place in the final was ours (not that we made much of it).

Again, thanks, Rich. What a man!