In the Beginning

THE FIRST THING I look for in young spinners – off-spin, left-arm orthodox, wristspin – is how much they spin the ball. Same as a fast bowler, I want to see them bowl fast; swing bowlers, let’s see them swing it; seamers, hit that seam! If he or she is not trying to spin the ball then I give them another title: slow bowler. Ashley Giles could spin one occasionally, but was more of a slow accurate bowler, and he played his role beautifully. I called him ‘Ashley Hit-Me-Miles’, because I liked to hit him miles. In the 2006 ‘Amazing Adelaide’ match, I ran down first ball after the drinks break and donged him over mid-on. He said, ‘You just don’t rate me, do you?’ I went, ‘Nah!’ (That’s banter by the way, not sledging. They’re two different things.) In fairness, ‘Gilo’ was a good cricketer – a man who made the most of his talents – but the point about spinning the ball is still valid.

Anyway, obvious as it sounds, the first thing I look for is spin. Then I look to see if spinners are trying to take wickets. It doesn’t matter what form of the game – Test matches down to T20 – it’s the same aim: to take wickets. I look at the fields they set and work out if they have a plan. Then it’s the bowling action itself, and whether there are any technical flaws that are stopping them spinning the ball. I don’t care so much about a textbook action, I’m looking for the position and angle of release, the drive of the hips and body, and the revolutions on the ball. If the ball doesn’t spin, then they have to fix their action. Simple. After that, it’s rhythm. You’ve got no chance without rhythm.

Let’s move on to the grip. One of the biggest keys to spinning the ball is where you put it in your hand. Too far back in the hand and you can’t get the leverage to release your fingers and wrist to spin the ball. I’ve heard coaches tell guys to grip the ball tight with their fingers spread wide. Wrong! In fact, in my view that’s the worst advice you can give, because it immediately makes a bowler feel tense; so the trick is to grip it loose and relax. The fingers should be set at a width that feels comfortable. Younger kids, with their smaller hands, can go a little wider to get more purchase, but a loose grip and a wicket-taking mindset are the places to start from. That’s basically it. Well, sort of. 

The Magic

The art of leg-spin is creating something that is not really there. It is a magic trick, surrounded by mystery, aura and fear. What is coming and how will it get there? At what speed, trajectory and with what sound, because when correctly released, the ball fizzes like electricity on a wire! How much flight, swerve, dip and spin and which way? Where will it land and what will happen? There is no bowler in the history of the game that a decent batsman couldn’t pick if he watched the hand, so a leg-spinner must distract and unsettle that batsman. Every leg-spinner gives the batsman a clue; some just disguise it better than others. Leg-spinners cannot create physical fear, in the way fast bowlers can, so they look to confuse and deceive. The intimidation factor in spin bowling comes from a batsman’s ignorance and consequent fear of embarrassment.

Few batsmen, if any, truly know what I do. To maintain that mystery I look to develop an atmosphere of uncertainty and, if possible, go further and bring chaos. It all begins with being in control, with winning the psychological battle. When I say I create things that aren’t there, I’m actually working with little things – subtleties like moving a fielder from one position to another and back again for no good reason other than to show the batsman I’m in charge of the pace of the game. As an example, I might move mid-wicket straighter but then decide he’s too straight, so I move him squarer again. In the end he hasn’t moved at all but I’ve held up the game and taken charge of the moment. Then, from the point at which I’m at the top of my mark, nothing can happen until I let go of the ball. The umpire can tell me to start 10 times if he wants but it doesn’t start until I let go of the ball.

In summary, I’m looking to create an environment where I’m boss. I might be all over the batsman for any number of unrelated reasons, simply because I want to get into his head. Often I just stare at him for no reason other than to see if I can spark a reaction. Sometimes I’ll hold up play by going to talk to my own captain or wicket-keeper about nothing. Nothing! But then, as I walk back to my mark, I’ll suggest things to the batsman that he’ll think are the result of that conversation. Then I’ll follow up by tinkering with the field or switching to bowl round the wicket, or pretending to sneakily move a fielder so he doesn’t see. It never takes me much longer than an over or two to work a guy out. Does he like to play quick or slow? Is he fidgety or calm? Can I change that? I’ll look for mannerisms – things like the way he walks to the middle, the way he takes guard, studies the field, grips his bat, calls for a single or two. Is he picking me from the hand, through the air, or off the pitch? Is he picking me at all? I’m out to understand his vibe. What, for example, is his default position – attack or defence? Is he happier forward or back? To beat a batsman, I have to get under his skin and into his head. Every cricketer has an insecurity somewhere, the challenge is to find it and expose it. There are weak blokes who have the talent to bat but just fall at your feet, and strong guys who don’t have the talent but fight you all the way. The art of leg-spin is not just bowling a legbreak; the art of leg-spin is to examine, deceive and outwit. That is the whole art. And within it is the magic.

The Set-Up

For me, the biggest thrill is the deception. Over a beer before Edgbaston in 1993, Allan Border asked me how I thought we could get Graham Gooch out. There was something in my subconscious that hadn’t really dawned on me until I was asked the question. I said that now I thought about it, I’d noticed how Goochie just put his foot down the pitch rather than towards the ball. I reckoned I could get one around his pads if I went straight, straight, straight for a while and then suddenly bowled one really wide of leg-stump from around the wicket. The Gatting ball is a rare thing because usually it takes time to nail a good player, especially if he’s already settled when you first come on to bowl. You kind of have to stalk him and then set him up. If a guy is a good sweeper, your line has to be outside off-stump, spinning away, with six fielders on the offside, and your length has to be fullish so he feels compelled to cover drive instead. By starving him of an easy ball to sweep, you challenge him to fetch it from dangerously wide of his go-to zone, and then, when you sense the frustration is eating away at him, you bowl faster and straighter, saying, ‘There’s the line you’re looking for, mate, go for it.’ I’ve hit the stumps and the pads more than a few times with a straightforward plan like that.

For someone who likes to use his feet, you bowl quicker and flatter to keep him at home, keep him in the crease, and when you sense he’s getting itchy, you bowl faster, faster, faster, faster, and then you slow one up and generally wider – away from his eye-line so he has to reach for it. Never in the same place you bowled your faster one, otherwise there’s no deception. When you change your pace like that the ball must land in a slightly different spot from the previous ones, which makes it harder to detect.

For the players who drive well, use their feet quickly and cut effectively either  side of point – Mark Waugh, say – you bowl a more leg-stump line, forcing him to work against the spin. You have to be accurate, otherwise you simply start again. I mean, you might go middle and leg, middle and leg, middle and leg. Then you think, ‘Right, now it’s time to bowl one higher and wider,’ and you drop it halfway down the deck and he smashes you for four! Time to start again – just don’t bowl another one there, you muppet.

Then there are basic, obvious things to look out for – like, when you drop one short the batsman knows the next one is likely to be fuller, and that’s generally when they run at you. It’s the same if you overpitch one; he knows you’re going to bowl faster the next ball so he camps back a bit. You have to read those and react. Concentration is paramount. Miss a moment and you miss the trick. Another thing to consider is the pitch. To get maximum spin, you have to bowl with different paces and trajectories on different pitches. Some days you might have to bowl a fraction quicker into the pitch, some days you have to bowl slower and higher. On fast pitches I use more over-spin, on slow pitches mainly more side-spin. It’s a misconception that the slower the pitch, the faster you bowl; in fact, I often bowled slower on slow pitches to take the pace off the ball. I used to get frustrated by Adelaide, a batting paradise, until I learnt that I needed more over-spin and could attack the stumps more. I had kind of always gone with the idea that you get them driving by lobbing it up there around and outside off-stump at the Adelaide Oval, but it never worked real well so I pressed harder to suffocate them and hurry the defensive shots into mistakes.

The Sting

Let’s get back to Goochie, a top-class player, and the best English batsman I bowled to. He was also hugely respected by Allan Border after his years in county cricket with Essex. We needed a good plan and I thought we had one. AB agreed. ‘Let’s go with it,’ he said.

We didn’t change the field at all because we didn’t want to give anything away. We left the leg-side mainly open: a man at 45 degrees for the sweep shot, another back just behind square on the boundary and a mid-on. Sometimes I’d have a mid-wicket or short-leg too, but very rarely anymore. If you pack the legside when bowling round the wicket, you send out a negative signal. If a legspinner has more fielders on the offside when bowling round the wicket, he is attacking.

I pretty much always bowled with that man saving a single behind square at 45 degrees because he was both an attacking catcher and a pressure builder when saving inside or under-edges. Then, of course, if I wanted to throw one out there to either bowl them round their legs or simply drag them outside leg-stump, I needed that fielder to keep them on strike. I always positioned him really fine. Most people would have him a lot wider, but I positioned him in my eye-line as I was running in, like my safety net. With the revs and bounce I got, I hated it if that fielder was beaten on his right-hand side. You should never get beaten on the right-hand side, never – not even from an under-edge, not if the fielder starts deep enough and knows what he’s doing. It has to be a good fielder there and if it goes to his left there’s a deep fielder for protection behind him too. Angles in the field are crucial and underrated.

Goochie had 40-odd, so he was seeing it well. We set the plan, denied him runs by bowling straight from round the wicket for a while and then slipped in the big wide one. Bingo! It spun a mile! If you watch the highlights of that dismissal, he just puts his foot straight down the pitch. Then you’ll see me pointing at AB, like ‘I told you!’, and we gave each other a high five that it came off.Most of the best plans are hatched out of hours, so to speak, not at those silly team meetings. A plan can come from anywhere at any time and the more you sit around and talk the game with good cricket minds, the more amazing things happen. In a formal environment they don’t happen, which is why I never liked team meetings because all you did was talk around in circles. They were a waste of time, because it was the same plan all the time: build pressure and hit the top of off-stump, with the occasional bouncer. Yeah, we get that. Now let’s go and chill.

Back to the sting.

Gooch wasn’t the only one, not by any means. Here’s another favourite. At the Basin Reserve in Wellington, there was a great battle with Andrew Jones, who had this hugely competitive spirit. I dropped a top-spinner short, long-hop length, and he smacked it for four, swaggering round the crease afterwards like he was Viv Richards. I kind of smiled at the umpire, Steve Dunne, and quietly said, ‘He thinks he can pick me now.’ After that, I bowled three or four orthodox leg-breaks in a row and then whispered to Steve, ‘Watch closely, I’ll be shouting real loud.’ I slipped Jones the flipper and as he went for the pull shot again, I could see the horror on his face. It hit him below the knee roll in front of all three. It was as good as the Alec Stewart one but didn’t have the Ashes hype with it. Steve didn’t smile much but I always thought his eyes were laughing when he gave that one out.

The Box of Tricks

The leg-break is key: you have to have a good, accurate leg-break. Then there is the top spinner, the wrong ’un, the flipper and the straight one. The straight one had a few different names – the slider and the zooter amongst them. The flipper was different because it comes from the front of the hand and is a faster delivery with back-spin on it, where a slider or zooter comes out of the side of the hand, like a leg-break, but goes straight on. And then I had what I called a backspinner, which is the one I bowled by rolling my wrist so that it points to the sky before I flick the fingers up and out.

It’s the same grip for every delivery, two fingers down, two fingers up. The ball sits in the space between the fingers and the palm of the hand and there should always be a gap between the palm and the ball; if there isn’t, the ball is too deep in the hand. The thumb rests on the ball, sort of like a rudder, and the third finger does all the work.

For a leg-break, the back of the hand is at 45 degrees to the ground and facing in towards me. It is almost the side of the hand that is pointing to the batsman and the third finger flicks out and towards the target. For the top-spinner, you change your wrist position to come over the top, revealing more of the back of the hand to the batsman in a vertical position, and though you use the third finger to spin it up, it’s actually the wrist that does most of the work. The wrong ’un is just the reverse to the leg-break, out of the back of the hand rather than the side. For the flipper you click your fingers. First, though, you put the ball in the front of the hand and squeeze it out between second finger and thumb, then click! It’s bloody hard to control and tough on the fingers and wrists. (Years ago in LA, Bo Jackson asked me to show him all the variations. He loved the flipper: ‘That’s amazing. How do you do that, man?!’)

The key to variation is not to change the pace of the mechanics. The temptation when trying to bowl a faster leg-break, say, is to use a faster arm; slower leg-break, slower arm. But there are ways you can do it by keeping your arm moving at the same pace. For example, by using a full rotation of the arc of the arm and releasing at a fractionally higher position at the top of that arc. The rotation is at the usual pace but the longer arc changes the  pace of the ball. When I bowl a quicker one, I release it with a slightly lower arm – a little more roundarm in effect – so, even though it will travel faster, it’s actually delivered by an arm travelling at roughly the same pace. The slower ball is the opposite and delivered with slightly higher arm.

The trick is to make sure you ‘bowl’ the variations, not just ‘put’ them there. My flipper was always the same pace. I would use the strength in my fingers to make the ball come out faster and flatter, which was fine until they started to show wear and tear. The flipper looked like a long-hop but skidded through real quick. When the flipper was on, it was some ball. Ask Alec Stewart, Andrew Jones and Richie Richardson.

Revolutions

The perception that the wind is the main reason for drift and/or dip is horseshit. It is all about angles and revolutions. Yes, if a right-arm leg-spinner bowls a stock ball on a breezy day and the wind is left to right, then, of course, it might drift in to the batsman. In that example, the angles matter most, both at the point of delivery and on the seam as it rotates. Get those right and there will be some natural movement of the ball.

But that’s not how you get the drift, dip and late curve that plays with a batsman’s mind. If he’s half good, he can work out the wind. He’s got to be very good to predict revolutions. The only way that you get curve and dip is from the amount of revs you put on the ball. There is a big difference between drift from the wind and curve from the revs on the ball. The curve happens later, for one thing. It doesn’t matter where the wind is – sideways, up your backside or full in your face. If a leggie puts revs on the ball, the ball will dip in; if an off-spinner puts revs on the ball, it will drift away. The wind can exaggerate that but bowling against it won’t stop it happening.

It isn’t where the ball pitches but how it gets there that’s most important. If there are no revs on the ball and it’s just released out of your hand rolling over on its axis, you can pitch in one spot all day long but it won’t do anything. However, if you spin the ball hard, with revs on it, and it curves and dips and lands in the same spot time after time, it becomes a threat. So, as I say, it’s about how it gets there more than where it pitches – anyone half good can pitch it. The things that make the difference are the side-spin and the over-spin that create the swerve and dip; and the position on the crease from where the ball is released which then creates the angles that challenge the batsman.

Energy on the ball is a combination of everything working together through the combination of shoulder, arm, wrist and fingers and how quickly my body works into sync to drive the ball forward and especially my hips. This doesn’t mean a fast arm but a fast, call it snap-like, release – the same as a batsman’s hand speed at the point of his strike on the ball. Everything has to be right, not least the alignment of your feet and hips that allows you to bowl over your front leg. Good balance is essential. Any bowler off balance will get a soft, rolling release of the ball because only the arm is propelling it.

These mechanics really matter. At the moment of delivery, my feet were roughly shoulder width apart and, as my right arm gathered, so the left arm gathered too, acting as the sight for the target and the pulley for the action. This way I could look over my left shoulder to take aim. The actual delivery of the ball begins with the left arm, or front arm, pulling hard downwards, and the right arm working in tandem with it as the body weight is then transferred forward and over the front leg. It is then about how fast you can flick out the ball with your fingers and wrist, while using every muscle in your shoulders, back and right hip to drive directly at the target. If you can’t drive your hips, you can’t have bowled over your front leg. Alignment is crucial because everything has to work together and move straight at the target.

There have been front-on leg-spinners, of course – Abdul Qadir to some degree and Mushtaq Ahmed – but they didn’t get the same curve or spin. The Gatting ball was the perfect leg-break because everything was aligned, including the stars!

Ideally, the seam rotates at 45 degrees – a little less for over-spin and a little more for greater side-spin. At 45 degrees, with max revs, the curve and the dip become as much a threat as the spin. Though the ball to Gatt spun a lot, it was the curve into him and the last split-second dip on the ball that confused him. Then it ripped. Goodnight, Gatt.

There are variations on this. I scrambled the seam occasionally and I rarely bowled the same ball from the same place on the crease. For example, I might repeat a delivery – a leg-break, say – 20 times consecutively, but from different angles on the crease, which creates the illusion that it’s a different ball. Only if everything was in my favour – like, there were footmarks everywhere on a pitch that was ragging and bouncing – would I bowl leg-break after leg-break at the same spot and pretty much always from the same position on the crease. Just occasionally I’d switch to go wide, or even super close to the stumps, but in general I’d aim at consistency of release and target.

Stay with me here, because this is important regarding field positions and mindset. When I attacked with the ball, and by that I mean used more variations – which in turn meant the possibility of some bad balls – I would defend more with the field. When conditions were in my favour, I wouldn’t worry about the variations but instead aim at leg-break after leg-break that gave nothing away to the batsman. I could then afford to attack more with the field placements. Understanding this strategy in detail makes a huge difference to the way you think – not just as a bowler, but as a cricketer in general.

For all that, wherever I bowled the ball from on the crease and wherever the seam was in the air, the one thing that could win me the moment – the gamebreaker – was the amount of revolutions on that ball.

The Process

There are some givens. On a flat pitch, start at middle and off-stump with five fielders on the offside. The easiest process for any young captain is: you’ve got nine fielders, so put four and four on each side and then you have one extra. Put him on the side to where the ball is spinning.

The more it turns, you’re starting mainly on leg-stump but with plenty of sliders or toppies so the batsman doesn’t get in the rhythm of kicking you away, unless you want him to. There is a valuable point there actually. The bowler should be dictating what shot is played. He should ask himself, what do I want the batsman to do? If I can get him playing my way, I’m winning. Every pitch is different so you have to quickly work out what your stock ball is going to be and at what pace. This depends on the pace and bounce in the surface. The slower it is, the fuller you need to be, otherwise they’ll play off the back foot too easily; the quicker and/or bouncier it is, the shorter you can be but with more over-spin. This gives them less time to adjust and why they nick off or get LBW. On slower pitches, you get them caught in the ring and off your own bowling as they drive too early or too hard or maybe shut the face of the bat too soon. And they chop on as well, trying to hit too square.

In general, I preferred less spin and more bounce, like the Gabba, because I felt bounce was the harder adjustment to make. I could bowl my leg-breaks, topspinners and the odd slider, wearing guys down and bringing bat/pad and slip into play. I didn’t like slower pitches so much, even though it was harder for batsmen to score. I didn’t mind getting hit as long as that opened up the possibility of taking wickets.

It was interesting when the speed gun came into the game. The majority of the time, I bowled somewhere between 78 and 83 kilometres per hour and I bowled ‘up’ at all those speeds never down, which doesn’t mean you can’t bowl flat by the way, just that you have to release up and out; otherwise no drift. The flipper was different, often over 100 kilometres per hour and with lower trajectory, which is why it looked like a short ball.

I always want to bowl into the wind, because the ball holds up in the wind – I couldn’t care less about being hit downwind – and I always liked to have the sun behind me. It’s a lot harder for the batsman to pick up the hand, and therefore to read you, with the sun behind your arm than it is when the sun is behind him – try it.

The Teachers

Richie Benaud taught me something interesting that I’ve passed on to a lot of the young kids who tell me they struggle to take wickets regularly. ‘Hey, Warney, I bowled 15 overs the other day and only got one wicket,’ they say. I ask them if they think I was any good and they say, ‘Yeah, you’re the best!’ Nice. Okay, how many balls do you reckon it took me to get a wicket? ‘Oh I don’t know, you probably got one every two or three overs.’ No, I got one  every nine to 10 overs – every 57.4 balls to be exact. Murali and all the other guys are around the same, nine to 10 overs to get a wicket. The message is that patience is very, very important to spinners.

Richie had given me a list of the strike rates of the top five spinners in Australia – surprisingly high – then he emphasised how important patience was. So I say to the kids, ‘Look at how many deliveries it takes for a spinner to take a wicket. Patience, accuracy, perseverance and guts matter more than anything else, except spinning the ball. Spinning the ball is number one.’ I’ve talked a lot about Terry Jenner in previous chapters. He taught me the most about leg-spin. I was also lucky to have guys like Jimmy Higgs who backed me from an early age when he was a selector in Victoria and who was brilliant when he came and bowled in the nets. Bob Paulsen and Jack Potter were real good too.

TJ gave me a lot of tough love and he was the first person who’d challenge me on things. But he never tried to change my action, grip or approach to the crease. He let me be me and then showed me what I could do with my ability. He used to love to say, ‘Don’t say can’t, Shane, let’s just try.’ He drummed in the importance of practice and accuracy, making me bowl each of the four main deliveries for hours, first at off-stump, then middle, then leg. He taught me the importance of an over-spinner too, convincing me that batsmen would mistake it for the wrong ’un. And he continually emphasised the three questions of what, when and why.

Not that I was a complete dummy. In fact, as I’ve often said, I love the strategy of the game and the tactics of a team or player in all sports. Even though I wasn’t good enough for Aussie Rules at the top level, for example, I still read the play well and more often than not was in the right place at the right time. In golf, I generally take the right option, especially when I’ve hit it into trouble. In tennis, I understand the serve/volley game, I get the angles in both attack and defence and know how a change of pace in a rally can change the momentum. I might not play these things right but I know what’s required. I’m sure that’s why captaincy brought out the best in me – I was ahead of the game and could see things before they happened. Now I try and call it from the commentary box as if I’m still out there playing.

We all need a mentor. TJ taught me how important patience and a plan were – what to bowl, when to bowl it and why – and he gave me confidence. We had a strong bond, which had come instantly and effortlessly. He was a very good man, a true friend and a reliable offsider who knew a whole lot about the game. Ian Healy called him the spin doctor because wherever I was in the world, I’d call TJ and he’d chat for as long as need be. Sometimes I’d say, ‘Ah mate, you wouldn’t believe it, blah blah blah,’ and I’d get all this stuff off my chest. He wouldn’t say a word for half an hour and then I’d say, ‘Thanks, mate, that feels better,’ and hang up!

He came over to Lord’s before the first Test in 2005. I wasn’t happy with my bowling at all and had other stuff – marriage and family issues mainly – flying around in my head. We spent two days on the Nursery ground, six hours each day. The night before the game we didn’t leave the nets till 6 pm, when I finally felt right. I had one of my best series ever and though we lost to England, I was proud to do myself justice under difficult circumstances. Thanks, TJ. 

Spin Up!

It was TJ who came up with the phrase ‘spin up’. Initially, when I got tired he noticed how my arm dropped too low to get any over-spin. I don’t know how low but around 45 degrees at a guess, so in order to make the adjustment he got me to think high. At first it felt like I was bowling up by my ear, even past the perpendicular, which is no good. But I wasn’t. In fact, looking at videos, it was close to where it should be. Then he added ‘spin up’ because if you fire it up and out you get the revs on it that will make it drop when it gets to the other end. If not, it’s a full toss – believe me! So think high and spin up became a bit of a mantra, whether tired or not, and it helped to get my weight over my front leg and drive the right hip.

I reckon, more than anything, that this was what made me effective late in the day. However tired, I could find another gear and sometimes with the ‘think high, spin up’ focus, I bowled better than when fresh. I certainly got a lot of wickets towards the end of a day’s play.

The Passion

I’m very passionate about spin bowling and in particular about leg-spin. I love to promote it and inspire others. I’ve worked with many of the best and we bounce off each other – Anil Kumble and Mushtaq Ahmed are great examples. I helped Mushy develop a flipper and then in the 1995 Sydney Test he took nine wickets in the match against us – oops. In the dressing-room our guys were saying, ‘Mushy’s got a flipper – he never had one before!’

Anil was a great competitor in all conditions and at his most dangerous on uneven surfaces. There’s a lot of knowledge out there and most of the guys have come to seek me out over the years, just to chat and share the experiences we’ve been through and the challenges we face. I think they know about my passion and care for leg-spin and that maybe I’ve looked into the art of it deeper than most. It’s my science and my gift, which is why I never treat it lightly. I still chew the fat with the brotherhood of spin and always will.

The world of spin isn’t only about wrist-spin. I call off-spin Darth Vader because it’s the dark side of spin. It’s easy to bowl and easy to hit. Anyone can be an off-spinner but not necessarily a good one. That’s harder. Off-spin is limited and predictable, so to step outside the box and make it effective takes some doing. The stand-outs in my time have been Tim May, who had a beautiful curve towards slip before that terrific off-break of his; Graeme Swann, who spun it hard at many different paces to suit all pitches and make life a nightmare for left-handers; and Murali, of course. Murali was something else. Eight hundred wickets is just incredible. One of the hardest bowlers to face in history. Genius. I’m going to talk about Murali later.

As a general rule, finger spinners need to find a way to beat the bat on both sides. Arm ball, drifter, high bounce or over-spin, doosra – whatever it may be, deception is their trick, almost as much as it is mine.

Leg-spin is bloody hard. It takes a big heart and a strong character; it needs a lot of love and good captaincy. I’ve seen so many guys messed about by shit captaincy. To me the best things in cricket are a fast bowler steaming in trying to knock the batsman’s head off and him taking it on, and a leg-spinner challenging an aggressive stroke-maker, especially one who uses his feet. But if the captain doesn’t get the fields right, well, the younger blokes have got no chance. There are a lot of leggies out there right now – Mitchell Swepson and Adam Zampa in Oz, Mason Crane, Adil Rashid and Matt Parkinson in the UK, Imran Tahir in South Africa, Yasir Shah and Shadab Khan in Pakistan, Rashid Khan from Afghanistan is a wonderful talent, Samuel Badree for West Indies, and, as ever, a fair few in India, including Kuldeep Yadav, who is a very exciting prospect. The first question is: are they up for the fight? The second is: do they know enough about what they do? It’s complicated and doesn’t come easy. Then you wonder if their captains know anything about spin.

T20 cricket is great for wrist-spin; 50 overs too, because the batsmen don’t have any option other than to chase the game, so you already know their mindset. Get the field right, land it right and a leggie will take wickets. Finding a way to take wickets in Test cricket is another challenge altogether and can be a long and often disheartening journey. In my first Test, as I’ve mentioned, I took 1/150 and got smashed by Ravi Shastri. In Crane’s first Test last summer in Australia, he took 1/193. That’s a pounding but he bowled okay to be honest and showed a lot of courage just to keep going. I really rate Yasir Shah, he’s got a great leg-break. I hope he recovers his best form but bad captaincy holds him back, along with his own lack of patience. The key for Yasir is to still have fun. That big smile tells us all we need to know about his attitude, which is so much of the battle. He’s got plenty of courage too and never gives up.

Spinning the ball is supposed to be fun and people are always interested in how it’s done. Everyone who likes cricket has a go at leg-spin at some time or another and they pretty much always find it difficult. You see guys landing the thing in the next-door net. That’s because it is hard! I’m proud that I’ve done well and prouder still that I’ve inspired. A family came up to me recently and said their son had learnt how to bowl leggies by watching me on YouTube – highlights of matches, packages of great deliveries (even I watch those sometimes!), masterclasses with different TV channels, clinics etc. How good is that? He learnt off YouTube!

History Lesson

I’ve mentioned that TJ always said, ‘Test cricket didn’t start in 1991/92 when you arrived, mate, a bit happened before then.’ However, because I grew up with Aussie Rules, I never got into the cricket history stuff. Not until World Series Cricket anyway.

I’ve had a look at the old leg-spinners on YouTube, though – Arthur Mailey, Clarrie Grimmett, Bill O’Reilly, and Richie, of course. Mailey didn’t use his left arm much – it’s probably why he wasn’t very accurate. He whipped his right arm over aggressively, though surprisingly low – about 45 degrees at a guess. He drove his right hip more than most, which helped him out, and he’s famous for 10/66 and all that – the day he got all 10 against Gloucestershire and the phrase then became the title of his autobiography.

I like the Grimmett story that he had a habit of clicking the fingers on his bowling hand real loud when he bowled a flipper and that, after a time, the batsman worked out when it was coming. So Grimmett started to click the fingers on his non-bowling hand when he bowled the leg-break too, and then the batsmen were all over the place! He was a New Zealander but he moved to Australia and ended up with 216 wickets in the days when not so many Tests were played. He was very accurate, they reckon, almost mean about giving runs away. They called him the ‘miser’ to Mailey’s ‘millionaire’. Apparently, he was the first to develop a slider. Ah ha, and I thought I was!

People reckon Bill O’Reilly was the toughest competitor and if Bradman says he’s the best bowler he saw, that’s good enough for me. They say he bowled it quick, nearer medium pace, and snarled his way through many a day. I love that. He and Grimmett bowled together for Australia for a while – the ‘Fox’ and the ‘Tiger’, as they were known. I just wish some of those guys had seen me in the mid-1990s. It would be nice if they’d known the leg-spin story was still being written.

I don’t know enough about them, truth be told. I know a lot more about Richie, who was the first to bowl round the wicket into the rough and make it respectable, or accepted. It wasn’t the done thing to bowl it out there in the old days, but at lunch on the last day of a Test at Old Trafford in 1961, England were cruising. Ray Lindwall was covering the tour for a news outlet and Richie asked what he thought about him going round the wicket and aiming into footmarks. Give it a go, said Ray, but you’d better be good at it, otherwise they’ll be all over you: the press, he meant by that. Well, the great man knocked England over, took six in no time from round the wicket, and the vision on YouTube is great – Simmo takes an unbelievable catch. Richie was pretty cool, shirt unbuttoned and leaping about the place when wickets fell. There’s been noone better for the game than Richie, and in so many different ways.

The Rough

As I’ve mentioned, it was when I was 12th man against India in 1992 that Bob Simpson got me interested in bowling round the wicket. It was a game-changer for me.

It took a lot of practice and a lot of strength from round there – much harder to  adapt than it looks – but I soon noticed how it helped my rhythm because if you don’t complete your action you bowl rubbish. You have to have a strong action from that angle of delivery just to make sure you get the ball up there on the right line, and it takes a lot out of you.

I see too many spinners just ‘putting’ the ball into the rough, not ‘bowling’ it there. They expect the rough to do the work, but this means they don’t get many revs on the ball so not much happens. Revs will bring irregular bounce, which is just as important as the spin. Mainly, this is because they’re terrified of bowling a bad ball. However, the ball won’t do much unless it’s fizzed in there with energy and effort. I don’t mean faster, I just mean a lot of revolutions at whatever pace is required for the surface you’re playing on. As I keep saying, it’s all about the revolutions!

To the right-handers I used to line up the pads and just try to bowl it outside their pads and spin it as hard as I could into that rough. Some of the deliveries I bowled to left-handers that stand out were Andrew Strauss at Edgbaston in 05, Shivnarine Chanderpaul in Sydney in 06 and Kevin Pietersen in Adelaide first ball later that year. These dismissals create that aura I was talking about earlier and create fear in the dressing-room.

Sometimes on dead pitches, I’d bowl a heap of big-spinning leg-breaks way out wide into the rough. Some spun and bounced, others skidded along the deck. They were all still missing leg-stump by miles but I did it to play with batsmen’s minds. It was a nightmare for the keeper, especially as there was no chance of taking a wicket, but it built a picture of what might come and that was the plan. Remember, always have a plan!

People, Places

I backed myself against anyone but, in the cases of Sachin Tendulkar and Brian Lara, there was more of a game of cat and mouse to play in the search for the high ground. In general, I set out to tell the opponent my story and to make sure he felt a very small part of it. I never rushed; in fact, my measured walk-in became a part of the overall impression of authority that I was trying to create. But Sachin and Brian weren’t bothered by any of that – they had their own story to tell.

Sachin was the best judge of length I played against – he was unbelievable in India on the ’98 tour – and very quick on his feet. He got down the pitch easily and could sweep well too, so the margins for error from my point of view were very small. Brian hit the gaps with uncanny accuracy, even when the ball pitched in the rough outside his off-stump, and because he played so late he could score off balls others did well to defend. He had a fantastic eye, a smart batting brain and really natural flair.

I know I’ve always said that Sachin was the best batsman during my time but, the longer I’ve thought about it, the harder it has become to separate them. They were the best two, for sure. Sachin was the better technician but Brian the more destructive shot-maker so, if I had to send someone out to bat for my life it would be Tendulkar; if I needed someone to chase 400 on the last day, it would be Lara.

Brian played the best two innings against us – 277 run out in Sydney in 1992/93 and 153 not out in Barbados in 1999, which won the game singlehandedly. He made 213 in Jamaica the game before, which wasn’t so dusty either by the way. Sachin’s unbeaten 155 in Chennai in 1998 is the next best. There was no bowling to either of them on those particular days.

I remember getting Sachin caught at slip fifth ball in the first innings in Chennai. In the second innings Mark Taylor brought me on as soon as Sachin came in and I quickly switched to bowl round the wicket and into the rough. He slogged the third ball into the stands at mid-wicket for six and just carried on from there, like a man possessed. After a few overs of this, Tub asked what I thought. ‘I think we’re fucked,’ I replied.

There’s no-one else close to them. Mark Waugh was probably the best of the Aussies – quick on his feet and he manipulated the field really well. Others who got me on occasions were Kevin Pietersen, brilliant on his day, and VVS Laxman – a fantastic player. Goochie was very good, but easier to control than KP or VVS. The one player I wished I had bowled at was Viv Richards. All the guys who played against him say he was different class, and in the days when Jason and I played in the backyard, Viv was always taking on Lillee, hooking him off his eyebrows.

I guess that, back then, I was subconsciously acting out the next phase of my life. I always loved the competition and the big stage. For me, it’s all about the contest. Of course, some places turn you on more than others. The Gabba might not be the greatest ground in the world, but I had a lot of success there because I enjoyed the extra bounce in the pitch – 68 wickets in just 11 Tests! I’d always go for bounce over spin, but when you had both  together, like at the Gabba, watch out.My favourite place is the Melbourne Cricket Ground. It’s a no-brainer. Ninety thousand people on Boxing Day – I mean, you can’t get better than that. It’s a happy time at Christmas and, being a Victorian, I get a fantastic reception each time I walk out there. The MCG is a coliseum and we are the gladiators. The noise when I took my 700th wicket, wow! It’s a hard act to replace!

The MCG has been so much a part of my life. As I’ve mentioned, as a kid I saw the climax of the 1982/83 Ashes Test when AB and Thommo nearly pulled off the miracle. Later, I played footy there, which was awesome. I’ve seen the changes to the ground, the pitches move, the drop-ins arrive, two World Cup finals and so much more. The biggest crowds, the greatest showpiece – that’s the ’G. The Sydney Cricket Ground and the Adelaide Oval are different,  Lord’s too. The spectators sit a lot closer to you than at the ’G, so it’s more intimate. These beautiful older grounds, theatres of cricket, make the game feel special. Then there are the personal favourites because of success – Old Trafford and Edgbaston were atmospheric and lively, Kensington Oval in Barbados as well. Both Colombo and Galle in Sri Lanka were great places to play. Cape Town is stunning and a special venue for me as I played my 100th Test match there – and I bowled a million overs in the game by the way, so it’s got a place in my heart somewhere.

The Indian grounds have a sense of excitement about them; I suppose because you know the whole country is watching just about every ball. Eden Gardens is a great stadium – 110,000 manic people. But I didn’t like playing there.  Three for 364 in two Tests! No thanks.

And Finally …

Spin is hard and spin is fun. The great news is that leg-spin bowling is back in fashion, especially in the short form of the game. I like to think that I’ve played my part in that – helping to make it modern and sexy and worth the effort. I’m proud that whenever the PA system at a ground said, ‘Coming on to bowl at the Members End is … Shane Warne,’ the spectators would be excited enough to get back to their seats in expectation of something,  anything, being about to happen.

That’s the magic.

To sum up, leg-spin is no half-hearted journey. You have to love to bowl legspin. I’ve been lucky to spin the ball further than most and to maintain consistency and accuracy. My personality has won a few battles and I’ve stayed strong when the chips have been down. I believed we could win every cricket match I played in and I have never, ever given up. If, after St Kilda sent me that letter saying thanks but no thanks, someone had said, ‘No worries, Warney, give it a decade or so and you’ll be voted one of the five greatest cricketers of the 20th century,’ I’d have laughed at them. I suppose it’s proof that anything is possible. As a mate of mine once pointed out about the challenges we all face, ‘If you think you can or you think you can’t, you’re probably right.’