My Mother

MUM IS ONE of the funniest people I’ve ever met, and most of the time she’s not even trying to be funny – the same as Mark Waugh! She’s not academic but she is street smart. What’s more, she has the best shit detector I know. I promise you, she could meet any of my friends and when they’ve gone she’ll say, ‘Great guy, you want him on your side,’ or ‘Lovely person but watch out for …’ I don’t know what it is but she just picks up on things – she has second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth senses. It’s weird, but extremely useful! She’s virtually never wrong either. It’s uncanny, as if she’s got a crystal ball. She’s like a witch but a good one, a spiritual one, if that makes any sense. Probably not, but I’d go to Mum about anyone.

When I was a kid, Mum went to work. She was hardly ever sick, never complained and brought us up great. We weren’t lovey-dovey in our house but we respected and loved each other deeply. She was born right after the war in 1946 in Germany. Her father was a Polish refugee who, when he was still a teenager, ended up in Germany on her grandparents’ cabbage farm. His name was Joey and he worked his nuts off on their property just outside Wesselburen. It was there he met Lotte. They were married and had their first child – my mum, Brigitte. A couple of years back, Mum and Dad went to find Wesselburen and, would you believe, they discovered that not only does it produce the most cabbages in Europe, it also has a cabbage museum, a cabbage festival and every year somebody is crowned Miss Cabbage – fact. Hence, Mum says she was born under a cabbage.

It wasn’t long before my grandfather Joey, my grandmother Lotte, Mum and her sister, Regina, had enough of living as cabbage-farm refugees and did a runner all the way to Rome, where they hoped to find a ship to America. Instead, they had to go further south to Naples. They found a ship there alright but the wrong one, and they all ended up coming to Australia. Apparently, the ships to the States were full, so rather than wait for months they bought into Australia’s land of opportunity. None of us are complaining – Australia has been a wonderful place for our family and I’d have been a pretty ordinary baseballer. Dad has a copy of the register list from the ship, the SS Castel Bianco. It shows passengers from a heap of Eastern European countries that left Naples on 29 November 1949 and arrived in Geelong on 29 December, and there are the names of the family that reared me: Wladyslaw Szczepiak and Lotte Szczepiak, Regina Szczepiak and Brigitte Szczepiak.

Wladyslaw (aka Joey) got a job in a lime factory in Geelong but his wife and children were taken hundreds of kilometres away to Bonegilla Army Camp, out Wagga Wagga way. Joey worked for six months or so without seeing them and pleaded for time off to go and find his family. They said, ‘If you leave here, Joey, you don’t have a job.’ So he quit. Then he made his way to Bonegilla and brought them back – how the hell he found them I don’t know, because he didn’t speak English. Then he and another Polish family rented a garage and the four parents worked shifts – at the Ford factory mainly – so there was always someone home for the kids.

Joey was a tough bastard. Mum didn’t like him much, but he worked hard – real hard, they say – and managed to save enough money to build a house in Geelong, fill it with brand new furniture and buy a new Vauxhall car. He was sitting pretty, but then some very dodgy Aussie, knowing Joey loved to work the land, sold him a farm in Apollo Bay, about 130 kilometres away on the Great Ocean Road. The bloke did a crook deal – convincing Joey that the farm was a phenomenal business opportunity and more than worth the value of the house in Geelong.

Joey did the deal and, much to the dismay of the rest of the family, they left a home they liked and made the journey to Apollo Bay. The farm was badly rundown – a really shitty place, apparently – but the land had a bit of potential. Somehow, they scraped a living from it and soon enough had upgraded to a dairy farm in Skenes Creek, a few kilometres east of Apollo Bay, which Joey said had potential to be something big. Unbelievable courage and determination in that man!

At 13 years of age, Mum got dragged out of school and was made to help work the land, clear the rocks, pick and shovel stuff and tear down the thistle. The property was about 550 acres – a lot of it unusable – but Joey, Lotte and Mum managed to clear around 175 acres of it. You have to hand it to them because in the years since then the land has become really valuable. Mum had a gift as a runner. For sure the manual work had developed her, both physically and mentally. She trained quietly when the opportunity arose and began to surprise people in competitive races, but her ambitions of Olympic glory – a dreamer, like her son! – were shattered when she got glandular fever. How unlucky is that? It knocked her about for a long time after. She’d missed her moment and didn’t run competitively again. And she never, ever complained. Mum is as tough as they come and probably the most honest person I know.

She left the farm when she was about 14 to work at the Apollo Bay Hotel, and a couple of years later, having made a success of the dairy farm, Joey bought the girls a house in Melbourne, in Moonee Ponds, for them to go to school and work there.

In the mid-1970s, Joey went inland to Gerangamete, about 35 kilometres out of Colac. The beef market was up, and he wanted to get out of dairy and into beef. But just as he did, world beef prices collapsed and the US Government put a tariff on Australian beef. There wasn’t money in beef anymore, so he went back to dairy!

By this time, Joey was easing up a little on the hard yards and decided he’d win Tattslotto, the local lottery. He got really passionate about it. Joey had a book and he used to write down every single Tattslotto draw number because he thought he’d found a system. He claimed the third and fourth division prizes plenty of times – they were never huge sums of money, though.

Dad reckons Joey was a difficult bloke with a bad temper. He used to get in fits of rage. For instance, he’d knock out a cow if it crapped on him while he was milking – he would be like BANG! He was strong and wide but only about five feet five inches tall. A tough little character, like a tank. We knew he was a good farmer, because he was on the front of one of the country magazines in Apollo Bay for ploughing an unploughable field. It was like a moonscape and he ploughed it like he was on a mission. It was dangerous work. The plough would only have to hit a rock and jump out and there was no way you wouldn’t end up in the creek, which my dad did once. Joey got the best out of his crops: that’s what he knew.

Then, out of nowhere, in the early 1980s a massive heart attack killed him. He just caved in, and about three years later my grandmother passed, both of them in their mid-to-late 50s. The trauma of their lives probably finally got to them. Like a lot of first-generation immigrants, they worked hard and died young. My grandmother was a big lady and nice. Jase and I never really spent that much time with Nan and Pop – as we knew them – although I remember Nan best for the white chocolate bars she gave us off the top shelf at her place. We must have been seven or eight back then.

Nan worked as hard as Joey, if not harder – she was the silent type who just got on with it. It was terrible when she got cancer. The doctors operated but didn’t hold out any hope and sent her home with three months to live. Mum and Dad chased around and found this guy called Milan Brych in the Cook Islands, who said he could bring cancer patients to remission. He used unorthodox methods, alternative medicine and he made outrageous claims about easing the pain and adding precious years to people’s lives, so the medical profession and pharma companies hated him.

I think Dad said he was jailed in three different countries, under suspicion of false medical practice. But Brych never said he could cure cancer, only delay the inevitable. Twenty-five per cent of his treatment was a mixture of apple seeds and other concoctions, 75 per cent of it was him getting people to believe that it worked. Brych needed all patients to bring medical records with them but the authorities wouldn’t release Nan’s. Dad said, ‘You’ve got me on your doorstop until you give me those documents.’ Eventually they sent him to another surgery that did hand them over. Mum then took Nan to the Cook Islands, Brych treated her and, incredibly, as promised, he gave her three more years of life than the doctors told her she had. She died at 57. It was sad because she was such a positive, uncomplaining person.

The immigrant families were hard people, they never gave in. I guess that’s what making a new life in someone else’s country does to you. They had good manners and kept a clean slate. Mum always shoved good manners down our throat. She said manners were free, and she harped on about being clean and tidy, picking stuff off the floor – that sort of thing. She’s round at my place most days, organising washing, cleaning and all that. She loves it. I’ve tried to follow her example by instilling good manners into my own kids and thankfully my children are wonderfully mannered.

We had so many laughs, and we still do. She calls me and my best mate, Aaron Hamill, the former Aussie Rules football star, the two ‘Rockafellas’. ‘Where are you Rockafellas off to then?’ That was where the diuretic pill came from. ‘Rockafella, you’re looking heavy, try one of my fluid tablets. Look good, feel good, Shane,’ she said. ‘Yeah,’ I thought, ‘give us one of them.’ Oh my God! Little did I know. More of that later. What I will say now is that nothing hurt me more than the way the Cricket Australia lawyer, Andrew Thwaites, bullied her in the courtroom during his cross-examination. Like it was her fault. Mum and Dad would welcome everyone to our home, it was an open-door policy. They also drove me and my brother Jason to and from all sports and made sure we were smart and ready for each day of our lives. Mum worked the canteen at the sports club – she was always giving back to people. Neither of them ever interfered, they only encouraged. Mum is a very special person – a strong parent with a keen eye for detail and an amazing ability to stand up for me when things get tough. I guess Mum is the tough one who just gets going. 

My Father


My dad, Keith, is my other hero. A bit like Mum, he has a tough story to tell. His own father, Malcolm, was born in Condobolin, a town with a strong Indigenous background in the middle of New South Wales. ‘Mac’, or ‘Boy’, as he was also known, was brought up on the hard side of the track by my great-grandfather, Norman, who was a big noise in the town and ruled with an iron fist. He would tie Mac and his brother to the bed and whip them if they did anything wrong. In his late teens Mac fell in love with a local Catholic girl called Anne, but Norman, a committed Protestant, wouldn’t let him marry her. That was Australia back then, like the Catholics Jack Fingleton and Bill O’Reilly against the Protestant Bradman and all that stuff in the 1930s.

Mac got nowhere in his pleas to his old man, so he left home to join the Air Force. One leave – and I’ve no idea when or where – he met, and quickly married, Dorothy. They had four kids, one of which, of course, was Dad. Jumping years ahead, Dorothy died and Mac was on his own – he was about 65 or 66 at this stage – forlorn and lonely. One ANZAC Day, with nothing else to do, he drove back to Condobolin, still very much a country town, and the news got out that ‘Boy’ Warne was back in town.

‘Tell him to go round to Walter’s place,’ they said. So Mac went round, knocked on the door, and there was this grey-haired old lady, Anne. She lived in Albury, but by coincidence was in Condobolin visiting friends – obviously, one of them was this Walter. Seeing Anne again, it was as if Grandpa had turned the clock back 50 years. He saw her as he’d always seen her and she saw him the same way. They struck up a relationship again.

Anne had had a terrible life – an abusive husband and a son who committed suicide – but now she and Grandpa were picking up where they left off when they were teenagers. He brought her down to meet the family. She was a lovely lady, Dad says, and without Norman around to stop them, they were planning to get married.

Six months later, though, Pa died and poor Anne went back to Albury on her own. It was incredibly sad. Dad had got a call from him one night, but when Pa heard the background noise of some folks having a good time at a social occasion, he said he’d call back in a day or two and quickly put down the phone. Three days later, they found him dead beside the phone in a chair.

He used to wear a mask that helped him breathe, and the enquiry into his death reckoned he must have been trying to put it on but couldn’t, so he rang for help, didn’t get it and panicked. He’d been dead for those three days and all his bits and pieces – the mask and other stuff – were around the chair. Dad and Pa didn’t get on that great, but Dad said he should have known something was up because Pa hardly ever rang. I was 14 when he passed. The Warnes were a complicated family in those days!

My father and his sister were born in Elsternwick, near Brighton of all places, where I’ve lived so much of my adult life. When Pa returned from the Second World War, houses were scarce and the owner of the place he’d been renting kicked him out. The four of them out on the street, no money and nowhere. Thank God he qualified for a War Service loan and bought a house in Boronia, up near Ferntree Gully at the foot of the Dandenongs.

Dad started at Ferntree Gully Tech but wanted to move to Ringwood High for fifth and sixth form, to complete his education. The problem was he needed a uniform and the old man couldn’t afford one. Pa owned a service station out at Coburg, so he said, ‘Why not come and work there and I’ll pay you. That way you can save up, buy a uniform and go to Ringwood.’ So he did. But Pa had other ideas. A bloke called Smedley, a customer at the gas station, was CEO of a company called Motor Credits, a car dealership finance company. Pa fixed a job for Dad with him – just an errand boy to start with – and told Dad to forget the uniform and Ringwood High and go and buy a suit instead, because he was starting with Motor Credits on Monday. Dad was around 15 at the time. He stayed two years and then went to Payne’s Bon Marche, the department store, to work in the accounting department. Dad is brilliant with numbers – he looks at lists of figures and has them sorted in seconds. He ended up managing that store but had enough of living with Pa and decided to make a clean break. He headed up to Queensland where he picked fruit, cut cane and worked on the railways. But after a couple of years, his mother, Dorothy, rang to say the council had half closed Sydney Road where Pa had the garage. He was losing a lot of business and couldn’t afford to hire anyone. Dad’s soft heart got the better of him and back he went to help out his old man.

Well, how about this: award after award came their way for being the best service station operators in Melbourne: you know, how they serviced the cars, looked after clients, treated customers and all that. Dad got really good at it until one evening a teenage couple pulled in and told him to clean their windscreen. There was a bit of drizzle on it, that’s all.

‘Err, okay,’ said Dad, and when he’d finished he said, ‘Now can I fill you up?’

They said, ‘Nah, we just wanted our windscreen cleaned because we’re going to the drive-in,’ and they started laughing.

Dad said, ‘Are you really?’, and then picked up a handful of dirt and chucked it across the whole windscreen before saying, ‘Now piss off.’

He turned around and there was his old man standing in the doorway with steam coming out of his ears. As far as he was concerned the couple could have been set up by his rivals to catch them out. Dad left that day, resigned on the spot, never to return.

He then went into white goods at H. G. Palmer’s, but that didn’t suit him much. He used to have to go to places to repossess fridges, amongst other things. A woman might come to the door, kids hanging off her skirt who hadn’t eaten for a day, and he’d have to say, ‘You haven’t paid for your fridge.’ She’d reply, ‘I haven’t got the money, I’m sorry.’ The kids looked hungry, she looked desperate, so he’d pay their monthly bill for them – and even give them money for fish and chips.

It’s no surprise he wasn’t successful at repossession work but his heart won many a day. Not least, the day when he met Brigitte Szczepiak. Lotte said that one day she picked up Brigitte after work, and when Mum got into the car she looked across the road and said to old Lotte, ‘You see that man over there? Well, I haven’t met him yet but I’m going to marry him.’

She was right. They were married at St Paul’s Church in Essendon three years later, on Mum’s 21st birthday.

It took a bit of doing. Dad was just short of his 21st birthday, he had a secondhand car that he owed 600 bucks on and not another dime to bless himself with. Joey, who was very protective of Mum, figured Dad must have had it easy – you know, a milk and honey life – because he’d finished up at H. G. Palmer’s and was out of a job, but seemed to have successful parents who carried him along. Not so, of course, but a hard one for Dad to explain. ‘So what ya got to be worth my daughter?’ he asked.

Dad didn’t have the answer but told Joey he’d prove himself more than worthy of his daughter, even without his blessing. Joey kind of relented but then said the wedding would have to take place in a Catholic church. Dad said no way: ‘I’ll pay for my own wedding in my own place and you’re welcome to come, Joey.’

They always clashed, though as I remember it Joey might have been tricky and liked to play hard ball, but he wasn’t unreasonable. I must be right because to Dad’s amazement, Joey said, ‘Okay, I’ll give you a start. I’ll give you the house in Moonee Ponds as a wedding present.’ Incredibly, Dad told him to stick the house up his arse. Dad! Mum almost reneged on the marriage! So Joey was a generous guy after all, but Dad wanted to make his own way – like Joey had, I suppose. As a thank you for his offer, Dad did Joey’s books for him for nothing and saved him some mighty tax bills.

Joey was good to me and Jason. He and Mum’s brother-in-law, Uncle Chris, used to take us for rides on their farm motorbikes and we’d feed the calves and mess around in the hay barn. I remember us kicking a football around with him and even setting up games of cricket. We did that in Mornington too, in the park opposite Mac and Dorothy’s place. Sadly, both sets of grandparents had gone by the time I was 15. I sometimes wonder what they’d think of the way things have turned out. I don’t suppose a living out of cricket was on their radar. After Keith and Brigitte got married, they rented a unit on St Kilda Road, lived the high life for six months and then suddenly realised they weren’t saving a penny. While Mum was pregnant with me, they went to live with Nan and Pa. Dad knuckled down with house re-blocking and pest control and then, on 13 September 1969, Shane Keith Warne was born at William Angliss Hospital in Upper Ferntree Gully. Keith had promised Brigitte that they’d have a house when she came out of hospital, so he flogged his car, borrowed a load from the bank, arranged a mortgage, and bought a $13,000 home in Hampton. When Mum came out of hospital with little me, she went straight to 229 Thomas Street.