John

WHEN I ARRIVED in Sri Lanka for the Singer series one-day tournament in September 1994, I was just 10 days or so short of my 25th birthday. All-up, I was earning about $25,000 a year from Cricket Australia – a figure made up of the retainer contract fee and match payments. The bigger bucks started to roll in that following Ashes summer at home, from the exciting sponsorship deals I signed with Nike and Just Jeans.

I love a punt. It never mattered whether I had money or not, it was the buzz that got me. A couple of hundred metres from the hotel in Colombo was a casino, and I love a casino – blackjack, roulette, poker, I love them all. Best of all, like in most casinos, if you gamble you get free drinks. On the first night, I lost five grand. Ouch, that hurt. So I needed a drink. I was pretty shitty about my loss when I went over to join Mark Waugh and a Sri Lankan mate of his at the bar – at least I’ve always assumed he was Sri Lankan. He was from the subcontinent, that much I know. The guy introduced himself as John. I said, ‘G’day, John, how are ya?’ He said, ‘Good, mate, good.’ It was a five or 10 minute conversation, nothing more than general chat – how’s the cricket, are you looking forward to the tour, blah blah blah.

At the end of the conversation, he said, ‘I see you like a punt on the roulette.’ ‘Yep, I love it,’ I told him, ‘but I lost all my money.’

‘Oh, right,’ he said. ‘Well, look, I’ve won a lot of money on Australia winning games of cricket over the years. Here’s a five-grand chip to cover you for the money you lost tonight.’

I said, ‘Mate, I’ve got my own money. I’m fine, thanks.’ He said, ‘No worries,’ and that was that. I went back to the hotel. You have to remember that back then there was no talk of bookies or spotfixing and match-fixing. It wasn’t on the game’s radar, not at all – no whispers, nothing. As a youngster, I wouldn’t have known a thing. Actually none of us would, I reckon. This was 24 years ago! There was no clue of what we know now.

The next day we finished training and went back to the hotel. The phone rang in my room – there were no mobiles then – and a bloke asked for Shane.

‘Yes,’ I said, ‘this is Shane.’

‘Hello, it’s John, I met you last night with Mark. I just wanted to come by, say g’day and have some lunch.’

I said, ‘Yeah, sure, I’m not doing anything. Any friend of Mark’s is a friend of mine.’

So we had a sandwich in the hotel lobby and he said he’d been thinking about last night. I remember his words pretty clearly.

‘Five thousand dollars is a lot of money. I want to give you back the $5000. No strings attached, no nothing – here is five grand, please take it. I love the way you play your cricket and I’m a wealthy man.’

I thought, ‘Hmmm.’ I said, ‘Mate, it’s very generous of you. I repeat, any friend of Mark’s is a friend of mine, but I don’t need it, so no problem and thank you, I’m fine.’

He said, ‘I insist, take it, no strings attached, from a friend to a friend.’ He kept arguing the case, in the end persuasively.

I took it.

Then I went down the casino that night and lost it again. I thought, ‘Shit, lost another five grand.’

So we did the tour and I never heard from or spoke to John again. Anyway, having missed the start of the series against the West Indies that summer I got back into the side for the Boxing Day Test. We were staying at the Hilton just across the park from the MCG and on Christmas morning the hotel phone rang.

‘Hello.’

‘Merry Christmas, mate.’

‘Who’s this?’

‘John.’

‘John who?’

‘I met you in Sri Lanka with Mark.’

‘Oh right, how are you, mate, what are you doing?’

‘I’m great, thanks. I thought I would just ring you to wish you a merry Christmas and congratulate you on getting back into the side.’

I thought, ‘How nice is that?’

‘Yeah, yeah, and I’m looking forward to the Test match against West Indies,’ he added.

‘Yeah, should be a cracker,’ I replied. ‘I’m looking forward to it too. It’s great being back in the side – I’m feeling in good form.’

We had a general chat about cricket. There were no alarm bells when he asked how the weather was in Melbourne. I said, ‘Fine, bit overcast but should be fine, good forecast for the five days, pitch looks good.’ I kind of chatted as you would to a journo if doing an interview – dry pitch, might spin towards the end of the match, should be good for me, blah blah blah.

‘Yeah cool, thanks,’ he said. ‘I am catching up with Junior soon, so I might see you around.’

‘Sure, mate, look forward to it. Have a good Christmas and all the best for the new year.’

That was that.

Until six months later.

We were in New Zealand for a one-day competition to mark the centenary of the New Zealand Cricket Council when the tour manager, Ian McDonald, took me aside. He asked if I knew anything about players taking money from outsiders for providing information on teams, pitches and weather. I didn’t, simple as that. What I could tell him, however, was that I’d been given five grand by a mate of Mark Waugh’s in Colombo back in September, in lieu of the five grand I’d lost at the roulette table. Macca listened to the story, and the more of it he heard, the trickier his position became. In a knowing way, he said that John was the same guy who had a business deal with Mark to provide this sort of information. I remember a bit of a sinking feeling, like, what had I got into? We were on the way to the West Indies a few weeks later and stopped off in London for a night or two to break up the journey. Bob Simpson and Jack Edwards, a St Kilda guy and the new team manager, pulled me in and asked about my dealings with a Sri Lankan bookmaker. I said I didn’t know any Sri Lankan bookmakers.

Jack said, ‘Mark Waugh reckons he introduced you in Sri Lanka.’ I said, ‘Oh, John, Junior’s mate. Yeah, I’ve spoken to him a couple of times.’ As I was telling Jack that John had given me five grand in the casino, his face changed colour. ‘He did what?!’

Jack said, ‘The bloke is a dodgy bookmaker who bets on cricket.’ I said, ‘Okay, that’s not good news but I didn’t know that when I spoke with him.’ As far as I was concerned he was a mate of Junior’s who gave me five grand after I’d lost five grand one night. ‘I’ve spoken to him a couple of times on the phone and that’s it. I’ve had no other dealings with him at all.’ Jack was in a state, saying, ‘This is trouble, real trouble.’

I said, ‘What do you mean? I haven’t done anything wrong here. If someone wants to give me five grand because I lost five grand in the casino, I’ll take the five grand. If he gives me 20 grand, I’ll take 20 if I choose to.’

Jack and Bob said, ‘No way, mate. This bloke is a bookmaker who bets on the cricket and Junior told us he has a business deal with him.’

‘Well, I didn’t,’ I told them. ‘I had some general chats about cricket with him, like I would with any journo at any time.’

They just said again, ‘Oh no, mate, this is bad.’

So this time I started shitting myself, thinking, ‘What have I done? I didn’t know the guy bets on cricket.’

I’d figured he was a gambler and he told me he won lots of money on Australian cricket, but I didn’t know anything about that world. I was 24, for Christ’s sake! Arghhhh! This was not funny. I didn’t understand but equally I began to wonder how I could have been so naive.

Jack said the board had decided to fine us both – me $8000 and Junior $10,000 – which left a very bad taste. He said it was as a warning signal to us and that the fines wouldn’t be made public. Then everything went quiet, as if it was understood that our fault was naivety and nothing worse, and, thankfully, it seemed as if the ACB had decided to move on.

But let’s go back a step, because when I was called in to Jack’s room I also told him about something else.

Salim Malik

We were playing Pakistan in Karachi, the opening Test of the 1994 tour. It was Mark Taylor’s first as captain and the pitch was a road. When play finished on the fourth day, Pakistan were 3/155, needing 314 to win. I was rooming with Tim May and that evening the phone rang.

‘Hello, Shane, it’s Salim Malik.’ The Pakistan captain, by the way.

‘G’day, mate, how are you?’

‘Not bad, not bad. Look, please, can I have a chat?’

‘Sure, what’s up?’

‘No, can you come to my room, please?’

‘Um, what for? Just talk, mate, I’m sitting here with Maysey.’

‘No, no, this is very important – you have got to come to my room.’

I thought, ‘This sounds serious. I hope all’s okay – maybe I should go, maybe I shouldn’t.’ What does he want, I wondered. I hung up the phone and Maysey asked who it was. ‘The Rat,’ I said. It was his nickname because we thought he looked like a rat, not because he was a rat.

Not at that stage, anyway.

I went to his room. He was dressed in a kurtha, the white robe style clothing the locals wear.

‘Thanks for coming up.’

‘Sure, mate, how can I help? You sounded very serious on the phone.’

‘We can’t lose tomorrow.’

‘Er, well, I’m sure you’re going to try and win and we’re going to try and win too. Should be a good game.’

‘No, no, you don’t understand. We can’t lose tomorrow.’

‘What do you mean you can’t lose?’

‘We can’t lose tomorrow. It would be devastation for Pakistan and for the players. People will have their houses burnt down.’

‘Well that’s unfortunate, mate,’ I told him, ‘but I’m here to win. We’re in good shape, the wicket is turning, I think I’m going to bowl alright tomorrow, so your hands are pretty full and I think we’ll probably win.’

‘Listen to what I’m saying to you,’ Malik said. ‘We cannot lose tomorrow and it’s down to you.’

I wondered what exactly he was getting at. ‘Right, so what is it that you’re saying to me?’

Then he dropped the bomb.

‘I am prepared to give you and Tim May $US200,000 each to bowl wide of off-stump tomorrow. It can be delivered to your room in half an hour.’ ‘Whaat? Sorry? Mate, please, you have to be kidding.’

‘We can’t lose tomorrow, please just make it a draw. Bowl wide of off-stump all day, we let the ball go and it’s a draw.’

I was thinking, ‘Fuck, $US200,000 each,’ and at first I was kind of laughing, but then I began to realise he was serious. Man, he had this look in him. ‘Yes, I’m serious. Cash, in half an hour, in your room.’

I said, ‘Jesus Christ, mate, I don’t know what to say other than no, and that we’re going to beat you tomorrow.’

‘So you don’t want the money.’

‘Of course I want $200,000 but not from you. We’re going to win the Test match and so I’ve gotta say no.’

‘Don’t rush. There’s no hurry. Think about it and let me know before tomorrow morning.’

‘There’s nothing to think about. We’re going to win tomorrow. Good luck. See ya.’

I ran down the corridor, heart racing and thinking, ‘What the hell just happened there?’ I stopped outside the door of my room. ‘Come on, Shane, be clear. You’ve just been offered $200,000 to bowl wide of off-stump. Yes, that is what happened.’

I went in and said to Maysey, ‘You’ll never guess what the Rat wanted.’ ‘Tell me.’

‘He offered you and me $US200,000 each, cash in here in half an hour, to bowl some shit wide of off-stump tomorrow.’

Maysey laughed. ‘I don’t need 200K to bowl shit!’ Pause. He looked at me again. For a moment there was silence. Then he said, ‘You serious?’

‘Yep.’

‘Shit.’

We started laughing, nervous laughing. Jeeesus, is he serious? What are we going to do? We quickly agreed the first thing was to tell Mark Taylor and Bob Simpson what had just happened. So I called their rooms and arranged a meeting. We told them the story. It was Tubby’s first Test match as captain, remember, which obviously he was pretty keen to win. Also, he’d already got a pair, so he hadn’t had a great match personally. To sum up, he had a lot on his mind. Then his two key bowlers for the conditions turn up and tell him Salim Malik has offered them $US200,000 each to bowl shit the next day.

You should have seen their faces! It was like, ‘Wow, what’s that about? Two hundred thousand dollars? Where does he get that from?’ I can’t emphasise enough how hard it was to comprehend. It was that new to us. We took a deep breath and then sort of all had a bit of a laugh about it, but it was another nervous laugh because we instinctively realised how dangerous it was.

In 1994, as I’ve mentioned, the match-fixing stuff just wasn’t on the radar.  No-one had ever thought a match was fixed, no-one had ever heard of spotfixing  or spread-betting – nothing. Honestly, we had a nervous giggle about it, resolved to brush it aside and win the match the next day. Then we went for a beer.

Bob Simpson wrote a report of our conversation and gave it to the match referee, John Reid, the former New Zealand player. ‘Holy shit,’ John said, ‘this is big. Leave it with me.’ We assume that John reported it to the ICC but we didn’t hear.

The Test had got to the last day with all results possible and no clear favourite. The way things turned out was incredible: this would be one of the most famous Test matches of all time.

I’d taken one of three wickets to fall on the fourth afternoon and I then took four more on the final day. It had begun with Pakistan requiring a further 159 with those seven wickets in hand. There was plenty of spin in the pitch and my confidence was high. I bowled almost unchanged. We chipped away all day, as did they with the bat. It was seriously good Test cricket that became increasingly tense with both teams in the hunt.

When the ninth wicket fell, 56 runs were still needed and we felt sure we had it covered. Big Jo Angel was playing his second Test – the first had been a while back, by the way – and was running in with tremendous heart and belief. Inzamam-ul-Haq was still there, looking to farm the strike with Mushtaq Ahmed – ‘Mushy’ – at the other end. The target was creeping down, so too the overs in the final hour, when Jo ripped a perfect reversed in-swinger into Inzy’s pads – smack dead LBW, thanks very much, game over.

Except that one of the umpires gave it not out. We were like, ‘What, you’re kidding, aren’t you?! That’s just out, stuck on the crease. Just plum, out.’ Geez, things were at fever pitch now. Both teams on the edge and the atmosphere electric out there.

‘Right,’ we thought, ‘we’re going to have to take more than one wicket here. Come on, boys.’ We then had more appeals turned down for catches and LBWs but, to be fair, nothing conclusively out. Inzy nicked and nudged and, in between, hit some really good shots. Mushy mainly blocked, played and missed, but then suddenly slogged the odd one for four. There was a point – with about 20 needed – when Inzy stepped up a gear, taking us on more aggressively, like he suddenly felt the pressure might get to Mushy.

It got down to three to win, that single wicket still in hand, and I was bowling. Imagine the scene. The night before I’d been offered $200,000 to throw the game. We had a report to the ICC hanging around and the opposing captain’s offer of money was its subject. It was bound to be hugely controversial. It was Tub’s first Test as captain and he’d got a pair. Pakistan needed three to win, nine wickets down. Some drama.

I was at the top of my mark. Tub came over and said, ‘Right, mate, how are we getting Inzy out?’

I said, ‘Driving or trying to whip it through mid-wicket. Do you like this plan, Tubs? I’ll bowl a big spinning leg-break at the stumps – let’s leave a big gap legside. If Inzy nails it, fair enough; if not, let’s hope he nicks it or falls out of his crease – stumped.’

‘Okay, like it,’ said Tub. ‘Let’s do that.’

So we had a bat-pad fielder on the on-side, a sweeper at straight-ish midwicket on the boundary and a man at 45 behind square for the top-edged sweep. We had just three men on the leg-side – no mid-on or mid-wicket, no-one in front of square except the sweeper. Well, I said I liked a gamble! My plan was to bowl wide of the crease and a fraction wide of leg-stump. We had two slips, batpad offside, short cover, mid-off and point just behind square. Standing there, spinning the ball from hand to hand, I thought, ‘Come on, after everything they don’t deserve this. I’m going to rip this leg-break to Inzy, rip it.’

And rip it, I did. It came out perfect. Inzy took a step or two down the pitch and tried to whip it through mid-wicket, overbalancing as it missed his outside edge. He was out of his ground.

Heals missed it too. It went through his legs for four byes. We stood there, rooted to the spot. The shock delayed our reaction. The game was over, the Test was lost. It took a moment to sink in. Pakistan had won the bloody Test. From nowhere, it felt like, from nowhere. We had ’em. But we’d lost. At the presentation ceremony I was announced as man of the match. So I’d got wickets, runs and then a gong. But I – we – had taken a beating, in more ways than one.

On the way to the podium I passed Salim Malik. ‘You should have taken the cash, shouldn’t you?’ he said.

I was ropeable. I should have turned round and knocked him out, but somehow resisted. I will never, ever forget that moment or that feeling. The massive contradictions everywhere and Salim Malik’s taunt.

Yes, that was a pretty famous Test match and, later, Salim Malik got rubbed out. So it became even more famous. To my knowledge at least, the can of worms that is match-fixing was opened there, in Karachi in 1994. Eventually, he was banned, initially for life. In the Pakistan courtroom that convicted him, he called me a liar, saying it never happened, that the meeting never took place. In my absence, he told them I was making it all up. He had tried the same thing on Mark Waugh, as it turned out. Junior went to Pakistan to give his testimony and the Rat called him a liar too. Basically, we dobbed on Salim Malik and got him rubbed out for life. Good thing.

‘Match-fixers’

Out of the blue, in 1998 I got called into Graham Halbish’s office – Graham was then CEO of the ACB. It was nearly four years after the incident with ‘John’ and I don’t know why it came to light at this particular point, but he said the board were under pressure to now make public the fines Junior and I had received in 1995. They still accepted I was pretty innocent in the whole thing, but said they had to be seen to have done something. I guess match-fixing was increasingly an issue for the game and, given that people were understanding better what was involved, they didn’t want to hide anything that had happened previously, however innocent it may have been at the time.

It was just after that meeting that the papers broke the story – a sensational story too – that Shane Warne and Mark Waugh had been fined for selling information about Test matches to a bookmaker. The Herald Sun put the two of us on the front page with the heading ‘Match-Fixers’. The press conference was a nightmare and Junior was booed onto the field in Adelaide.

We immediately went down the legal route to sue the Herald Sun but ended up doing a deal to write for them instead. John Hartigan was the big boss at News Limited and a huge Australian media figure. The day before the court case he rang to say, ‘You don’t want to do this and we don’t want to do this, so let’s find a deal that hires you as a News Limited columnist.’ And that was that. I copped the punishment, learning my lesson the hard way. The facts are that I took $5000 off a stranger who was a mate of Mark Waugh’s. I didn’t know he was a bookmaker. I’ll always say we got a rough deal but I accept I was naive. Looking back, what stranger gives you five grand unless there’s something in it for him?

I trust people, I always have. Call it a character flaw if you like, but I’ll always say g’day to people, I’ll accept most interview requests and chat about cricket to pretty much anyone.

There were no mobiles back then. On tour we watched telly in the hotel room or played table tennis, billiards and darts. If not, we just hung out by the pool, talking cricket. We’d chat about the game, the opposition, about where to bowl to them and all that stuff. Plenty of people were on the fringe of those conversations and plenty of others wanted to be. John was a nice enough guy. I only met him twice, for a maximum 30 minutes in total. I liked him, no problem. So when he rang me on Christmas Day, I was happy enough to chat to him. I doubt the conversation lasted 10 minutes.

I was hurt that the ACB didn’t stand up for us more than they did but, equally, I understand that I did the wrong thing. I never knew why the board held it back for so long – for four years after I first told them. My guess is that some journo got a sniff of it and though the board wanted to keep it under wraps they couldn’t do so any longer. It would have been better if they’d come clean at the time. There was no code of conduct back then and no anti-corruption units and/or advice to the players of the dangers around them. I never, ever thought about fixing games, bowling rubbish on purpose or whatever. When people called us match-fixers and said we’d sold out on Australian cricket, it was hard. But I understand how big it was and I’m glad that people saw the facts in the end. Salim Malik was banned, that’s what matters.

Hansie

I had no idea that Hansie Cronje was fixing games and was totally blown away when it all came out. I actually felt sorry for him. He was such a competitive player. I really enjoyed and respected him and would never have imagined he was involved, even among the rumours that were rife in cricket in the late 1990s and into the new millennium. Big names and unknowns – it didn’t seem to matter, suddenly match-fixing was the talk of the game. Unfortunately, Hansie got involved in something he probably started relatively innocently and then became addicted to. For sure, he got in too far. From the point of view of an outsider looking in, he got trapped and later deeply regretted doing what he did, particularly coercing guys like Herschelle Gibbs and Henry Williams. That was almost the worst part of it.

There was no sympathy for Hansie but there wasn’t any great hatred either. We liked Hansie and respected him. When he died in the plane crash, it was so so sad. The whole thing made us second guess everyone and everything. You start thinking back to games and go, ‘Well hang on, I remember some bloke couldn’t hit it off the square,’ and you ask yourself, ‘Was he trying?’ We never once thought Hansie wasn’t trying.

IPL

I was captain/coach of the Rajasthan Royals in the IPL for four years. Everyone in our side was 100 per cent committed and honest in their effort for us, but there were whispers, even before the tournament began in 2008, of some big names on the take. The anti-corruption people gave us lectures, and were pretty conspicuous wherever we went, but I wanted to be sure our guys were clean, so I came up with a plan.

Darren Berry was assistant coach and Jeremy Snape was performance director/psychologist. In a meeting with them, I said I wanted to nip any idea of corruption in the bud. My plan was to tell the players that my own phone had been tapped and that I’d been called in to see IPL Chairman and Commissioner Lalit Modi and the IPL heavies because an investigation had been launched into a conversation that had taken place on it. They said, ‘Great idea.’

We had a training camp organised in the build-up to the first game. Each day we practised and talked. We planned set plays for the first and last ball of overs, for example; trained the minds of go-to bowlers in certain pressure situations; decided on, and then drilled, specific fielding positions for everyone; divided the 20 overs into three sections of six and one of two and established each person’s role in those periods. We worked in private groups where the players would represent their own views and then offer views on others. Then we arrived at a collective agreement on team style of play. The three of us in management sold the vision, the players bought into it.

After one intense group session, I called everyone in and dramatically  changed the subject. I said, ‘Guys, something very serious has happened to me overnight. I want you to know that I had a cricket conversation with a friend in Australia a couple of days ago and that I’ve been hauled into the IPL offices, where I was told my phone had been tapped during the conversation and that I’m now under suspicion. In other words, the conversation I had was recorded and I’m being investigated.

‘Don’t worry, it’s all good. I’ve done nothing wrong but Lalit Modi and his offsiders are on the case. It’s a warning and a lesson to us all. If any of you try to fix games, throw games and the like, you will be banned. You may never get an opportunity like the IPL again so I leave it to you as to how you handle it, but while you’re with the Royals and under my captaincy, there is zero tolerance for any form of fixing. Be warned that your mobiles and your hotel-room phones are being tapped. I’m in trouble right now but I’m going to be fine. You won’t be if you put a foot out of line.’

Well, you could have heard a pin drop. Graeme Smith, Shane Watson, Dimi Mascarenhas, Kamran Akmal, Younis Khan, Sohail Tanvir and all the Indians in our squad of 20 – silence. Job done.

Hopefully one day the bad guys will be weeded out. It’s almost impossible to police the game and the only way is for the players to come clean on everything they know, which is a tough thing for anyone to do. Match-fixing is like a cancer. Terrible. Cricket is too great a game to be destroyed by a greedy few.