I ANNOUNCED MY retirement from international cricket soon after midday on 21 December 2006, almost exactly 15 years after first appearing for Australia against India at the Sydney Cricket Ground. I probably wasn’t ready back then in January 1992, but now I knew for sure that the time was right to wave it goodbye. As Ian Chappell said to me, ‘It’s better they ask "Why are you?" than "Why don’t you?"’ I was done, physically and mentally, and had the feeling that I’d run out of arse anyway. You can’t play at that level without it. I don’t care who you are!

The timing of the announcement meant that I’d play a final Boxing Day Test against England on my home ground five days later, and then finish with the New Year Test in Sydney, where it all started. Nice symmetry.

The build-up to that Boxing Day Test was manic – understandably, I guess. By the time Christmas Day came I was cooked, so it was a relief to have a few hours of nothing with my family and children.

I had a few chuckles to myself about how my life in the game had panned out. I mean, going into the occasion I valued above all others with 699 Test match wickets under my belt, and gunning for number 700 at the Melbourne Cricket Ground, of all places – well, it doesn’t get any better than that. I knew there’d be sadness too, partly because I still loved playing Test match cricket and partly because I was saying goodbye (or thought I was!) to the mighty ’G. I’d set the phone at full volume, and I remember how the suddenness of the 5 am alarm makes for that feeling of shock when it wakes you up from a deep sleep. There was no time for the usual snooze buttons and then the last-minute panic to get ready: I had to move right then. Urrgghh. It had been a bad night. I’d last checked the time at 3.30 am and then fallen into the kind of heavy sleep that knocks you about a bit. It took a while to get my head round where I was and what I was doing. I rolled over, stiff and sore as usual, lit the first cigarette of the day and checked out texts and emails. There were hundreds of ’em. Then I pulled myself together – shower, suit, tie, R. M. Williams black suede boots. I had a juice and, yep, another dart.

I was hosting a Boxing Day breakfast event for the Shane Warne Foundation, the charity I’d started to help seriously ill and underprivileged children. Today was different in so many ways. It wasn’t like I hadn’t played a Boxing Day Test before – I’d played nine of them – but this was the last one, which is a totally different thing. At that stage the foundation had raised three million dollars for various children’s causes and this brekkie was a big deal for us as we looked to push forward to even greater things. And then, of course, there was the Ashes, which gives everything an extra kick.

The MCG was a second home and being a Victorian playing in a Boxing Day Test is extra special. The crowd is so passionate, so unconditionally on your side, and that feeling of being wanted and loved – well, there’s no pretending you don’t like that, I don’t care who you are. So to play my last-ever game there was big, really big.

I had this absolute certainty that we’d bowl first. Driving to the Crown Towers ballroom for the brekkie, I began imagining the moment when Ricky Ponting would throw me the ball in front of nearly 90,000 people. Bring it on. My phone was hot. There were a million tickets to sort out for friends and family; a thousand people coming to the breakfast wanting value for money; Michael Clarke and Kevin Pietersen, the star guests, to check on; cars for them (I was so grateful to them for giving up their time on game day); auction items; last-minute changes to the seating plan – just so much stuff. I had a full-time PA, as well as some volunteers working on the event, but in the end the thing came down to me and I wanted to get it right. Then there was the Test match to play. During breakfast, I made a speech and we gave out significant cheques to our chosen charities, all of which made me feel great. Then I hung around for a while, mingled with the happy faces in the crowd, did some photos and signatures with the Barmy Army and shook a lot of hands. Above all, I wanted to thank everyone for their support. I left about 8.30 am, determined to be at the ground before the rest of the guys. I was first there.

Victoria’s Australian players are recognised with photographs on the dressingroom wall. I sat under mine, the furthest away from everyone else’s lockers so I could smoke in my own little corner. Usually I sleep well, really well, and I’m hardly ever nervous. I do remember shitting myself in my first Test match but was generally alright after that. But on Boxing Day morning 2006, I felt uneasy, and was pleased to have a few minutes to myself.

All alone, with not a single distraction, I looked around the dressing-room and thought about 17 years of first-class cricket whizzing by me. I had arrived as a kid and would leave a little less of one. It hit me how much I’d miss it: the changing-room banter; 90,000 people in the crowd; the heat of the battle. What an amazing ride it had been. Proudly, emotionally, I smiled to myself and thought, ‘Wow, that was fun.’

I thought about Allan Border, Merv Hughes, Mark Taylor, Mark Waugh – all the guys I started out with – and the great days of ‘Babsie’ Boon’s hat-trick catch and the Richie Richardson flipper in the seven-for in my first Boxing Day Test. I thought right back to ‘AB’ and Jeff Thomson’s last-wicket partnership against the Poms in 1982/83, with us kids in the stands willing them over the line, but how Ian Botham had won the game at the last gasp – great Ashes cricket, inspiring wonderful memories. Then I started to imagine how it could be me today. I kind of hoped we might bat so I could have an afternoon nap but, deep down, I just knew we’d be bowling. Destiny was loud that day.

Then the guys arrived in twos and threes and the room took on a new life. All the Christmas wishes and nervous energy wrapped up in a group of egos thrown together to play cricket for Australia. We could hardly wait. It was like it was bursting out of us. We’d regained the Ashes in Perth the week before, speedy revenge for 2005 in England. Now we had our feet on the Poms’ throats, we wanted 5–0.

Destiny had its say. We lost the toss and we would bowl first. It had suddenly got very cold. Hard rain swept over the ’G and play was delayed for half an hour. It had been so hot leading up to the game and the change caught everyone off guard. In fact, everything felt weird, almost eerie. We were on edge, as was the crowd, all of us keen to get going.

When the rain stopped and the umpires announced the start time, I remember everyone wishing me the best. ‘Good luck, mate’, ‘Yeah good luck, Warney’, ‘Go well, King’, ‘Have a great day, mate’ etc, and I was like, ‘Yep, thanks, guys’. To be honest, it felt terrific that the players were excited for me at this moment – they understood what it meant to me. They also knew that a 700th wicket would create history.

As the minutes ticked by to the start, I began thinking, ‘Geez, the guy who writes these scripts, he’s good. This is another beauty!’ And then I wondered if I’d do it justice. Suddenly I was over-thinking everything. ‘What if they’re 0/100 and smashing me, what then?’ Little demons I had hardly ever known before were now my enemy. ‘Stop it, mate! Just get out there and bowl and it’ll be fine,’ I thought, as I had my last dart.

So, eventually we ran out there to 90,000 people screaming and yelling and again I thought, ‘Bring this on!’ It was like someone had shut the negativeenergy door and opened the positive one. White-line fever, I suppose. Ah yes, I thought, this is my place …

England were 2/82 when Ricky Ponting threw me the ball. Andrew Strauss, on 48, and Paul Collingwood on 11, looked set. It’s always harder to come on when batsmen are ‘in’. Their feet are going, usually their timing is right, and they’re obviously comfortable and increasingly confident. It’s especially difficult for a spinner, so the trick is to find a way to stay on. First thing for me was to peel off the long-sleeve jumper that most of us were wearing and to somehow warm up the fingers that were a little older than when they’d first got to work in the late 1980s.

As I mentioned, I was unusually nervous before the toss but I was excited too. How could I not be: my last-ever game at the MCG, friends, family and my three children watching their dad – all of it special. All the talk amongst family and friends was around who would be number 700 and how would you like to get him out, etc, etc. I just thought, ‘I really don’t care. Just let me get it sooner rather than later!’

I started okay, slowly but surely finding some rhythm. On the first day of a Test match there’s rarely much spin on offer, so bowling is all about changes of pace, angles on the crease and deception. I sensed Collingwood and Strauss had decided not to let me settle. I remember Collingwood running down a couple of times, but he went a bit early so I had time to adjust. I think he got me once down the ground but I didn’t mind that because I was starting to hit my straps. I was encouraged to take a few more risks by slowing the ball up and giving it more of a rip. I beat the bat a couple of times and could feel in my bones that both batsmen were surprised by the spin. Usually, the response to this is to turn the bat into a broom, and sweep. Strauss timed a couple of sweeps well, so at the end of the over I suggested to Ricky Ponting that we block his area behind square on the leg-side and try to force him to drive off the front foot straight down the ground. ‘Punter’ liked it. We moved mid-wicket into square leg and put in a 45-degree sweeper behind square for the top edge. We made a show of these changes, talking loudly to each other from distance and pretty much telling Strauss the plan.

Whenever I walked onto the cricket field, it was like someone had shut a door behind me. I could block out everything else in my life and focus directly on what had to be done in that moment. I’m the first to admit that I have weaknesses but getting into the ‘zone’ was a definite strength. You hear commentators in all sports say, ‘He or she is in the zone today,’ but exactly what is the zone? To me it’s the state of total concentration; a place of calm and awareness that allows you to control and direct events as you see them. It’s also the ability to switch on and off, so you don’t become tight under pressure and make unnecessary mistakes. When you get it right, you feel pretty good. In fact, you feel everything happens slowly and so clearly.

The morning nerves had gone soon after play got underway. Now, I was in the zone. Throughout my career, I backed myself to knock anyone over. So much of sport is in the mind and the more aggressive you think, the more things will go in your favour. Equally, the more defensive you think, the more they won’t. Even when guys like Lara and Tendulkar were smacking me around, I wanted the ball in my hand and the chance to get them out. I loved the tactical and strategic challenges, and the contest.

This was one of them: England on Boxing Day with Strauss and Collingwood building a partnership. My idea was to bowl slower, higher and wider of offstump and to keep encouraging Strauss to drive. Away I went with the plan.
I worked him wide of the crease, too wide to sweep, and could feel his frustration at not being able to score. For two overs it was cat and mouse and then, instinctively, I knew it was time to go for the kill.

I threw up a top-spinning leggie and, as soon as it left my hand, it felt good. I spun it right up, high into the cold air, which suckered Strauss into going for the big drive. Then it dipped.

He kind of got stuck on the crease, playing a half-shot aiming to drive the ball through mid-on. He missed. The ball hit the top of middle stump. Seven hundred.

You little ripper!

I started running. I’ve got no idea why – I just did. The crowd went berserk – just nuts. In 23 years in the game, I’ve never heard a louder roar. (The only one that comes close was also at the MCG when Mitchell Starc bowled Brendon McCullum in the first over of the 2015 World Cup final.) I’ll treasure that moment forever more.

I hadn’t planned what I was going to do – you can’t really because the game situation dictates the celebration. For example, it might be cruising time in the middle of the afternoon and it’s ‘Oh yeah, I got a wicket’, or it might be ‘Hey, we badly need a wicket’ and then you go off a bit. So I don’t know why I started running around, sort of demented. My team-mates were all over me, which meant a lot as they were genuinely happy for me, which I see as a sign of a good team – the enjoyment of each other’s success. The guys still say the same thing over a beer now, ‘Do you remember Boxing Day when the crowd erupted and you got the 700? How bloody loud was that!’

We went through them after that. I got 5/33 and we knocked them over for 159 – from 2/101! It was an emotional and hugely special moment walking off with nearly 90,000 people standing, cheering and chanting your name. I don’t think it was so much about the overall achievement of 700 wickets – though being the first to get there was pretty cool – it was more about that precise moment. It’s hard to explain but the only way I can try is to say that I sensed everyone in Australia wanted me to take the 700th that day – cricket lovers or non-cricket lovers – like it was a celebration of my career over a long period. Cricket fans had stuck with me, forgiven me and still  supported me, and at that unforgettable moment it was like we were all together, along with family and friends, in the city I love most, at the stadium I love most. The 700th wicket was a bonus; in all honesty it could have been the 100th. The point was that I think Australians were happy to share it, on Boxing Day of all days. I’ve since realised that it brought a lot of joy to people who’ve lived my life with me from when I started out as a naive 22-year-old, through all the madness and a bit of the magic, to the final throw of the dice here in my own backyard.

Looking back I’ve often thought my life has been a bit like The Truman Show – after all, I turned from boy into man on people’s televisions. As a kid I made plenty of mistakes, and still make a few to this day, but I’ve achieved things that have brought smiles and happiness. The public grew up with me, just as they did on The Truman Show, sort of living and breathing it all. I think they could relate to me, as I’ve never pretended to be something I’m not. Australians love the Australian cricket team and they tune in for the next instalment with the players whose stories they share. It’s like ‘Hey, Warney’s about to bowl’, and they come in from the backyard to have a look. I’ve tried to repay their enthusiasm by being an entertainer with a sense of fun. I want to do well for the team, for my country and for everyone who watches us. And I like to entertain. Perhaps it’s as simple, or as complicated, as that.