Home and Away

IN THE EARLY part of 1989 I opened a letter from St Kilda Football Club that shattered my dreams. The long and short of it was ‘Your services are no longer required’.

Dad says that my final ‘trial’ went against me. I’d been playing for the St Kilda Under 19s, doing okay, and I’d been on stand-by for the next step up – to the senior division – for six weeks in a row. Then, the day they called, I’d been sick in bed all week, really weak, and I hadn’t been to training. Dad remembers that I’d climbed out of bed to ring Gary Colling, the coach of the Under 19s, to pull out of the match, but Gary beat me to it and said I was needed to play in the senior reserves match the next day. On the day I was offered my big chance, I was as sick as a dog. Strange how life turns out – sliding doors and all that. Anyway, instead of saying I was too crook to play, I said, ‘Wow, yeah, alright, I’ll be there.’

It was a disaster. Playing against Carlton, I was up against Milham Hanna, one of the fastest men in the league – a couple of years later, he’d be selected in the All-Australian team – and I had nothing. I was white as a sheet. The people who matter just figured I wasn’t up to it and dropped me back down to the Under 19s. But although Dad says I was ill and should never have played in that match, the truth is that I wasn’t good enough – not a mile off, but in the end not good enough. That’s hard to take. It went deep, like my soul had been ripped out. I was in love with AFL football but the game was not in love with me. What the hell was I going to do? I had passed Year 12 exams but wasn’t qualified for anything that would make me a few bucks. I had sport on the brain, but I needed some money and didn’t want to be dependent on my parents. So the first thing was to get a job. I drove trucks for Forty Winks, setting up new beds in people’s homes. I even delivered waterbeds, though they never appealed to me – honest! From seven o’clock on Friday evenings, through the weekend, I delivered pizzas, which was worth an extra 20 bucks a night. The only problem  was that I love pizza, so when I knocked off at midnight I’d smash a large ham and pineapple – that I had to pay for myself – which only left me with 12 bucks profit on the night.

Then I found a job with one of Mum’s friends at Paterson’s jewellers, handling signet rings, engagement rings, wedding rings, necklaces, bracelets – stuff like that – but it wasn’t for me. The more I searched for the right thing, the more my shattered dream kept reappearing. I was circling, waiting, wondering about the next thing in my life – not impatiently but, then again, not too patiently either. There had to be something beyond footy that was better than delivering beds and pizzas.

It was late in the summer of 1989 – February, March time – that I saw the first sign of it. I’d just got into the first XI at St Kilda Cricket Club and then, very soon after, into the Victorian state squad. I’d started to think about cricket a lot. As I’ve said, it didn’t have a place in my heart like footy, but it was taking over my head. I asked myself questions. Who are the great players? Which of them should I emulate? Who should I listen to? How do I improve? Where does all that start?

Later that March, a mate of mine, Ricky Gough, said he was heading over to play club cricket in England and suggested I give footy a miss for the winter and go over with him to play the leagues in the West Country. I thought, ‘To hell with it. Why not?’

So, in the late English spring of 1989, I joined up with the Imperial Club in Bristol. I was 19 years old and began to hang out with a bunch of great guys who loved a beer and taught me how to drink a pint. We’re talking truckloads of them. I was 79 kilograms on the scales when I left Oz and I came back 99 kilos. I learned to drink, play cricket and, well, a few other things about life too! Ricky and I slept in the cricket pavilion for the first few weeks and crashed out there. A season in England introduces you to the game in a really interesting way. There’s a lot of cricket – like three, four, sometimes even five games a week, many of them social and only one, the Saturday league game, seriously competitive – which allows you to bowl so many overs in such different conditions and circumstances. You learn about yourself and your game. It’s a terrific experience.

We went all over the West Country: Devon, Torquay, Exeter, Exmouth, St Ives. I remember playing against the New Zealand Test batsman Mark Greatbatch down there somewhere and he was equally amazed at how much cricket there was if you went looking for it. The responsibility of being the overseas pro was good for me: batting at three, four or five, depending on the make-up of the team each week, and bowling on soft pitches. I played as a batting all-rounder and was surprised at how driven I was: (a) to learn and (b) to succeed.

It wasn’t anywhere near county cricket level – more like second or third grade in Melbourne, to be honest – but it was competitive enough for me to have to pull a finger out or be the Aussie pro who made a goose of himself. I was there for six months and played 70 or 80 games. In Australia it would take you four or five years to play that many games, so I fast-tracked my learning and – as well as unravelling how to drink 10 pints and jump the counter at Miss Millie’s, the local KFC-type place – I got to understand my craft a little more.

I took a lot of wickets, made plenty of runs and began to think, ‘Right, you can play this game. You’d better start paying attention, mate.’ I also picked up on how competitive I was. The norm in Australia was not the norm in Bristol and the stand-out difference between me and most others was my desire to win. Not that I’d yet perfected the art of any sort of gamesmanship – like staring down an opponent, intimidation, sledging, or creating the aura that made each ball appear to have the potential of a hand grenade. There was none of that – just overs and concentration. It was the start of the 10,000 hours theory, the simple principle that to become world-class in your field, you have to put in 10,000 hours of practice. If you include net practice, I must have bowled 2000 overs, working on leg-breaks, wrong ’uns and flippers. I kept knocking people over, which gave me confidence, and by the end of that English summer those dreams of mine began to change. Although footy still held its place in my heart, I was beginning to properly appreciate cricket’s appeal.

A couple of years later, in early 1991, the maverick character Terry Jenner, who had bowled leg-breaks for Australia in the 1970s – and more of TJ in a while – introduced me to Neil Hawke, the former Australian swing bowler. Hawke teed me up with Accrington in the Lancashire League as the overseas pro. I kind of wanted to go back to Bristol but I was on a fiver a week there for painting the fences. At Accrington I was offered between £1500 and £2000 – plus car, airfare and accommodation. I thought, ‘Wow, I’ve gotta do this.’ So I used to drive miles up and down the motorway to get on the piss with the boys in Bristol through the night and then, too often, arrive back at Accy the next morning worse for wear.

I had an okay house, a little terraced place with a lounge room and a couple of bedrooms. It was clean and close to the cricket club. Fine. The ground itself was good and the locals loved the cricket, brought their kids along and generally got behind their blokes. (I later discovered that a young Jimmy Anderson had operated the scoreboard when we played at Burnley; a talented lad from the first day they saw him, apparently.) I hadn’t realised how important this Lancashire League cricket was – it was more important than Test cricket in their world. The supporters got there really early and I remember arriving for the first game and thinking, ‘Whoa, look at this lot!’ In Bristol a few blokes came along for a beer but in Accy there were loads of people setting up their barbecues and stuff – there were people everywhere.

Anyway, the first game, batting at four, I got run out. The committee called me in and said, ‘Listen, the pro never gets run out. You have to learn to turn your back on the bloke and burn him.’ I argued back, saying the run out was just one of those things and that I wasn’t going to be burning anyone. ‘No way,’ they said, ‘the pro doesn’t get run out.’ End of story. Oh, okay. I was thrown by this and didn’t bowl great. The opposition hammered me. Not a great start! Anyway, in the next game at home to Ramsbottom, Rudi Bryson, the South African quick – and he was quick – who was playing as their pro was straining at the leash to nail me. He never had the chance. I came in at 2/113, nicely placed on a good deck, while Rudi was having a breather. But this bloke Stephen ‘Dasher’ Dearden just tore in and knocked my off-stump out of the ground first ball. I watched that stump cartwheel all the way back to the keeper, and as I walked off I heard, ‘Go home, pro, you’re roobbish.’ I didn’t bowl too good that game either. We got smashed and I started to think, ‘Jeeeesus, I should have stuck with footy this winter.’

I woke up on Monday morning and gave myself a good hard look in the mirror. ‘Grow up, stop larking about and have a crack.’ On the Tuesday, I turned up at training on time, rolled up my sleeves and got into it, bowling full-on, fielding like I meant it, working with the youngsters, and talking the game to everyone at the club who’d listen. I managed to turn things around a bit and finished with 12 four-wicket bags – eight of which became five-fers – out of a total of 73 wickets that summer, and made 329 runs too. So I did alright. We weren’t the best team. Billy, the keeper, couldn’t pick anything I bowled except an orthodox leg-break, so we had all sorts of coded signals for each different ball. It never worked – it was the summer of four byes! No-one could pick my flipper: no-one. It became a bit of a laugh. Most of them were as bad at it as Daryll Cullinan.

In general, though, the standard of cricket was good; better than in Bristol and equivalent to second grade in Melbourne, except for the international pro in each team. The pros in Lancashire that year were Paul Reiffel, Chris Mack, Rod Tucker, Roger Harper and some lively West Indian batters and quicks. As I say, it was funny too. Billy the Keeper was one of a number of blokes who tried hard but weren’t turning pro anytime soon. There was a guy called Ian Birtwistle, who ran in almost 40 yards and bowled so slowly that I had him covered with my leg-breaks. But Birtwistle lobbed them on a length and no-one could hit them anywhere. It was hilarious to watch.

No, we weren’t much good but the responsibility improved me, as it does if you sign to play county cricket. The pressure to perform is something we all have to learn. And the rules were simple: if you didn’t perform they bagged you! Or worse, they didn’t even bother to talk to you.

I was still drinking beer then. It wasn’t until Sri Lanka 1992 that I woke up and got off it. At Accy we had collections for the pro if he scored 50 or took a ‘Michelle’, a five-fer. They usually amounted to something between 20 and 40 quid and I’d always say, ‘Let’s put it on the bar.’ I was told that the pros previous to me had kept the money in their pockets and headed back to their digs at the first opportunity, and they loved that I hung around with them and spent it. I can’t stress enough how important it is to play in the UK if the chance arises. It was an invaluable experience for me. I batted up the order, bowled every over from one end and learnt a great deal about myself and the game.

That was the Accrington season. I made some good mates up there, but not quite the lifelong friendships that I’d forged in Bristol. That didn’t matter. The learning curve mattered, and I was thankful to the club for the opportunity. I watched England on the TV in the 1989 Ashes series when Border’s side crushed them. It was a big surprise because Botham, Gower, Gooch, Gatting, Lamb, Emburey and Edmonds had kind of dominated the earlier stuff I’d watched in Australia in 1986/87. I liked watching Robin Smith that summer – all the Bristol guys used to talk about him in the pub. His big heart came over loud and clear. We never thought England were soft; I mean, they weren’t the West Indies but they were pretty good. And the more I watched, the more I started to analyse. How would I get Gooch out? Where would I bowl to Gatting and Gower? I still hadn’t grasped a passion for the game of cricket but I now had a genuine interest in it and an appetite to know more.

Back at home, in the summer of 1989/90 – between my two stints in the UK – St Kilda had as good a club side as was going around in our part of the world. Grade cricket was very strong and guys like Dean Jones, Fleming, Reiffel, Hughes, O’Donnell – all Australian Test cricketers – appeared regularly. We also had guys like Andrew Lynch and Ivan Wingreen, who would have played state cricket during a weaker period in Victoria and a strong captain in Shaun Graf.

I remember a game against Dandenong, Rodney Hogg’s side, when I did well. I’d bowled to Hoggy, who at the time had a column in the Truth newspaper. He wrote that there was this kid called Warne playing for St Kilda, who would end up taking 400 Test wickets. Everyone laughed. It wasn’t funny for Hoggy, who got the sack. Ridiculous. Anyway, he uses the gag in his stand-up routine now, admitting that the paper was right and he should have known better. As the punchline goes, the kid didn’t get 400 after all, he got 700!

So, the standard of grade cricket was high and the intensity extreme. The impact on youngsters was amazing – all of us wide-eyed kids who never said a word, we just listened and watched in awe. I’ll tell you something: I never got a grade five-fer. I made a couple of hundreds but never, ever took a five-wicket haul. The guys could play and we weren’t often in the field for a whole day so I’d bowl about 15 overs, not many more. My gift had always been to spin the ball. At East Sandy, we’d played on matting and that really exaggerated the turn and bounce, so we all tried to spin it miles. I was skinny back then and didn’t have the strength to keep repeating it, but when I did spin it, the thing did go miles. It was bloody exciting to see it go so far.

Yeah, I guess the talent was there, but I still wasn’t taking it seriously enough. I expected something for nothing and was on the beer way too much and larking about with the game. The fact is, I was a bogan. I still am deep down, really. And, thanks to Dad, a bit of a petrol head too. I had this TC Cortina, a beige/creamy colour, winding sunroof, big mags, three on the floor. I loved it, and loved the huge stereo. The car was worth about $1500 and the stereo almost a grand of that! The speakers came from Strathfield Car Radios and were fitted with extra bass. I cranked it up, super loud and listened to Big Pig, Rod Stewart, The Stones, Kiss, Fleetwood Mac, ELO, Neil Diamond and Bruce Springsteen’s Born to Run. Oh, and Aussie Crawl, Mondo Rock and Cold Chisel. I was killing it in grade cricket and training with the state side, and yet I knew – I could feel – that the senior Victorian players were feeling me out and knew I could spin the ball but thought, ‘He’s out on the piss every night and not really taking this seriously. He turns up on time, he’s a nice fella with lots of ability, but hell, what do we do with him?!’

I was thinking and breathing the game but I couldn’t settle down with the game – I think it was the passion thing, or lack of it. I was still on the outside looking in, not quite ready to be inside and part of it all. Cricket is definitely not a game you can be half-hearted about, as the guys were about to tell me. Before I got into the state side, I was 12th man against New South Wales. Bill Lawry was the team manager and I remember sitting down after a day’s play and a guy called Gary Watts, who had his feet up on the esky with the beers in it, said, ‘Twelthy, get us a beer.’ I was like, ‘What?! The beers are under your feet, mate.’ He said, ‘I want a beer, youngster, so get me an effing beer.’ I was like, ‘Okay, mate, lift your feet up. I’ll hold onto them and get out a beer.’ So I did, and then he said, ‘Open it for me, son.’ So I did and only just stopped myself from chucking the whole damn thing over him.

The 12th man wasn’t allowed to shower either, at least not until everyone else had. It was pathetic, but back then, in the late ’80s and early ’90s, that’s how it was. I thought it was a joke and to some degree it put me off playing. I didn’t think the bullying culture was right back then, but I don’t think the culture is right now either. It’s all too easy these days, young blokes walking in and thinking they’re part of the furniture. They make a couple of hundreds in grade cricket and get picked for the state team. Suddenly they expect a milliondollar contract, and an Australian cap. That’s bullshit. The opportunities in the three forms of the game in the modern era mean a lot of the young players out there don’t know how hard international cricket can be. Everyone – except Bradman, I suppose, although even he was dropped after his first Test match – goes through a form slump and the challenge is to fight back from that and earn your place the second time, along with the respect that comes with that fightback. I believe in all sports if you struggle at the start of your career, you appreciate the success and how hard that level is. If it comes too easy at the start, then when you have a form slump you have nothing to fall back on. That’s when you see so many sportspeople in all sports being a flash in the pan. The early Shield games I played were tougher cricket than a lot of Test matches – Victoria vs New South Wales back then was basically the Aussie batters against the Aussie bowlers. So New South Wales was Michael Slater, Mark Taylor, Steve Waugh, Mark Waugh, Michael Bevan, Greg Matthews, Phil Emery, Geoff Lawson, Wayne Holdsworth, Adrian Tucker and Glenn McGrath. We had Wayne Phillips, Matthew Elliott, Dean Jones, Jamie Siddons, Brad Hodge, Simon O’Donnell, Tony Dodemaide, Darren Berry, me, Damien Fleming, Merv Hughes and Paul Reiffel.

It was unbelievable cricket and we were at each other from the first ball till the last. I used to say to Taylor, ‘Tubs, you can’t pick me, mate, and soon enough, I’m knocking you over.’ And he would bounce back with ‘No chance, I’m going to smash you, Warne.’ Harmless banter but fun. I got along really well with Tubs and we were always winding each other up. I remember a game at North Sydney Oval when I said to him, ‘I could lob up an off-break and get you out, Tubby.’ Right after the drinks break, I did lob up an off-break and he topedged it straight into the hands of short square-leg. ‘Yesss. Thanks, Tubby!’ Then we sat in the rooms with a beer and had a yarn. We talked a lot of cricket, all of us. The more I listened, the more I learnt. Tubby is the best captain I played under and one of my closest friends in cricket. He’s a ripping bloke – honest and fair. And I wish he was running Australian cricket.

The Academy

What is now called Australia’s Centre of Excellence used to be called the Cricket Academy. I much preferred ‘Academy’ because it’s a place to improve and develop – ‘Centre of Excellence’ sounds full of itself and arrogant. The old Cricket Academy in Adelaide, set up by the Australian Institute of Sport in conjunction with the ACB, was fantastic. I don’t like what they’ve done to it now.

It used to be a 12-month program. Over time it got shortened which is fine, but it still needs an element of time to improve your skills and to be under expert tutelage to make sure you’re on the right track – from a technical point of view, a thinking point of view and in particular a mindset/strategy point of view. I think what they’re doing now is trying to cram too much into a short space of time. These days, they have a bowling week, a captain’s week, spin bowling week etc, but for some people that can be information overload – it should be spread out over a period of time.

Cricket has evolved since I was at the Academy and there’s more sports science nowadays. I’m happy to move with the times with all the technology and computers – anything that can give you an edge or an advantage is going to help you. But I think it’s gone too far in that direction. I think the Academy should concentrate on improving your basic cricket skills – fielding, batting, bowling – and help you to understand what’s going wrong in a game, so you can selfimprove during a game. There’s nothing worse than someone saying, ‘It just wasn’t my day’ – it’s a pet hate of mine. You have to find a way to get into the game, and that comes from knowing yourself – one of the best pieces of advice I got early from Ian Chappell.

Anyway, as I understood it, in those days the state selectors nominated players of their own and the Aussie selectors put the seal on the final intake. That year there was me and a guy called Stephen Cottrell from Victoria; Justin Langer and Damien Martyn from Western Australia; David Castle and Stuart Oliver from Tasmania; Greg Blewett, who was local to Adelaide, and Scott Moody and Daryl Conroy from Darwin. We were the second intake and I accepted the offer not really knowing what to expect but figuring it was sure better than delivering pizza.

Jack Potter and Peter Spence were running the Academy then. I was considered a surprise choice in that 1990/91 draft. I remember driving the TC Cortina over to Adelaide from Melbourne. I was immediately struck by the level of investment in young talent the Institute was making. We were expected to work bloody hard at our game and accept the kind of discipline and commitment that might, or might not, help us to get to the top.

Jack Potter was a bloody good cricketer and coach; Peter Spence was more an early-day version of John Buchanan. I’ve always bumped heads with coaches who try to reinvent the wheel. It’s a simple game – don’t over-complicate it! It’s no surprise really that me and Spence didn’t get along so well.

I’m pretty sure the guys in the year before us lived in a building that we used a lot for training and lectures and stuff in Henley. Our group was billeted out to the Alberton Hotel in Port Adelaide, which was run by a good bloke called Peter ‘Beans’ O’Brien and his wife. Me, billeted to a pub! So there we all were – barely out of our teens – sent across to Adelaide to improve our cricket, and we were living upstairs in a pub. Not promising. Meanwhile, back at base in Henley, Jack and Peter always seemed to be at each other’s throats. We never knew why but we could see they didn’t agree on much. Suddenly one day they had gone. The battle between them had been no good for us and the end result of it was that we ended up at nets and at training on our own. Jack was a cool guy, a good man, great on cricket, great brain. He knew a bit about leg-spin too. I missed him when he left – we all did. He gave us direction and confidence.

Back at the pub, Pete poured the beers and his wife cooked for us. We played a lot of pool – Justin Langer still owes me a thousand bucks. I’m unlikely to see it now! My room was three metres by three with a stunning picture of Elle Macpherson on the wall. (She’s a friend now and pretty much as hot as she was then too.)

We were up each morning at 6 am. I had a dart or two out of the window, shared communal showers with other paying guests of the pub, and allowed myself about 15 minutes for anything on toast – egg, beans, vegemite or sometimes spaghetti – before the sprint into Adelaide. JL, Steve C and me, the three of us with cars, would race the 35-minute drive down the Port Road to Adelaide Number 2 Oval. JL was a terrible driver but his family owned a car yard, and over the year he had three or four cars and smashed them all. I got along great with JL and respected him. He was a very, very hard worker. I saw a lot of people who had a lot more talent than Justin Langer but they weren’t as successful because they didn’t have his determination or discipline. But it’s no secret that I didn’t like the baggy-green worship rubbish that he liked so much. Steve Waugh brought it in when he was captain and tried to force it on the rest of us. Steve, JL, Gilly, Matthew Hayden – they loved it but, to be honest, they made me want to puke with it half the time. I mean, wearing it at Wimbledon! Who wears a green cricket cap to Wimbledon? It was just embarrassing! Mark Waugh felt the same. I don’t need a baggy green to prove what playing for Australia means to me or to the people who watch us. A sunhat will do. The proof is in how you play the game.

But even that gushing about the baggy green didn’t get in the way of my admiration for JL’s attitude to cricket. He never gave up, was super disciplined and worked his arse off to become a very good Test player. He and Haydos had a great record together. Some verbal diarrhoea with it – there often was with Haydos – but they could really bat.

Blewy, in contrast to JL, was a fluent and elegant player. Maybe he didn’t quite have the focus and discipline that JL had, but he had a beautiful drive, hooked and pulled the short stuff easily, bowled nicely, fielded great. He was a bloody good player who should have played more for Australia. Marto was one of my best friends in cricket. We were at the Academy together, made our first-class debuts at the same time and were the first two young guys inducted into the old-school Aussie team – Border, Marsh, Reid, McDermott, Hughes, Jones, all those guys. I was 22, still a kid in so many ways. Then Marto came in at 19 or 20 and he was the same. But what a talent he was – wow. We went to Sri Lanka together in 1992 and used to run the drinks in some of the one-day games. It was like school, looking up to the big guys.

Marto could really play – he was in a different class. After Mark Waugh, he was the most gifted I’d seen up close. No-one timed the ball better or had more time to play. It was like everything was in slow motion when he batted. And he could bowl alright too – he had that happy knack of getting top players out. And he fielded naturally, brilliantly.

Unfortunately as it turned out, I set him up with his first fiancée, Simone, through an evening out with me and my own Simone. The four of us met at Bobby McGee’s, a bar in Melbourne. We had a ball and he fell in love that night, proposed soon after and they immediately moved in together. He was 20, I think, maybe 21! A year later, he came back from a tour and she locked him out of his own house. My God, they used to go hard at each other. The lock-out worked in his favour, actually. It was like: end of relationship!

For a long while I felt I owed Marto one, because that night in Bobby McGee’s ended up causing him all sorts of grief. Thankfully he was later to marry very happily and I’m pleased to say that Elizabeth Hurley and I had a hand in it. He was staying with us in the Cotswolds in England and kept saying to Elizabeth, ‘You must have a friend for me. Come on, all the women you know!’ So we set him up with Lucy, a lovely Aussie girl who was living in England and working on a part-time basis for Elizabeth in PR. Two months later he called to say they were engaged!

‘I’m getting married to Lucy.’

‘Marto,’ I said, ‘not again. Please, mate! I can’t go through it all again.’

‘No, no, this is it, the real deal,’ he insisted.

I thought, ‘Oh my God.’ I mean, Lucy is a great chick, but come on, guys, you’ve only just got it together. He’s very impulsive, that Damien Martyn. Anyway, they’re still together six years on and I’ve never seen him so happy, so I suppose Elizabeth and I can say we set it right!

Back to his cricket for a minute. I’ve talked about the talent but not yet about his instinct for the game, which was a reason he was the second youngest-ever Western Australia captain, just past his 23rd birthday. He was a good choice for his tactical nous but it was too early otherwise. There was still an arrogance in him that needed ironing out. I’d argue that he was picked for Australia too soon as well. Some guys, for whatever reason, just aren’t quite ready.

Mind you, he was unfairly binned after we lost to South Africa at the SCG in January 1994. It was a small run chase, just 117, and the senior batsmen got out playing big shots. We lost by five. Marto hung in there tough with the tail – 59 balls across an hour and 45 minutes for six runs – and then, with only a few needed, he drove a length ball into the hands of cover. The press made him the scapegoat and the selectors dropped him for – wait for it – six years! Some experienced guys played rubbish shots and stayed in the team. Also, South Africa were outstanding. When you lose, you always know you could have done better, but remember, the opposition is trying just as hard as you are! Marto took it to the wire and got the bullet. That was very harsh; in fact, just straight unfair. Maybe that arrogance in him rubbed too many people up the wrong way. In hindsight, I think being dropped was the best thing for him. He came back a wonderful player. Geez, he was good. Mark Waugh was the better all-round batsman but Marto was his equal as an artist.

Martyn, Blewett, Langer – three ways to skin a cat. Each of them a lesson to others, especially youngsters, but in very different ways. The message is that it takes all sorts and it don’t come easy. You have to treat the game well to get the most from your talent. Ask JL – he’s proof of the right way. Treat it badly, or lightly, and it bites you hard. Cricket offers no hiding place. I was about to find that out for myself.

One of the replacements for Potter and Spence was Andrew Sincock, who was still blow-drying his hair long after Ian Chappell said about him, ‘No quick bowler of mine who blow-dries his hair gets the new ball,’ so Chappelli opened up in a Shield game with off-spinner Ashley Mallett instead – love that! The other was Barry Causby, a bank teller who’d played a bit of first-class cricket for South Australia in the Chappell days too. Neither of them were Jack Potter, not close. It was chaos and, increasingly, a waste of time in my view. As much as I hadn’t liked Peter Spence, he was strong on discipline and I trained my arse off under him. Peter cared about us and about the game – I’ll give him that. Just because you don’t agree with a person, you must respect the position – unless the guy is a total imbecile – especially if he’s good at what he does. And Jack? Well, Jack just knew the game and understood us youngsters who were trying to make it big. Without Jack and Peter, trouble loomed. We had no direction. We went to Darwin for some games. It was stinking hot and Blewy was with me in the pool. There were a couple of girls up on a balcony and, as boys do, we tried to get their attention by yelling up, ‘Hey, girls, check this out!’ and I started flashing brown eyes out of the pool. ‘Come on, girls, jump in the pool with us!’ Stupid, really, but harmless fun in my view. Anyway, they did invite us to their room but it never went any further. We had a drink, a laugh and then left. End of story, or so I thought.

Next day, we got called into a meeting saying that a couple of guys had been out of order yesterday and the incident had been reported. I was thinking, ‘Geez, what’s happened – who’s done something?’ ‘We’re talking about the pool yesterday,’ said Sincock, before asking the culprits to own up.

‘No problem,’ I said, ‘that’s me,’ and I told them exactly what happened. Then we went to a private room for a chat.

‘We think you’re a liability,’ one of them said, ‘and we’ve decided to send you back to Adelaide.’

‘Okay, that’s a bit harsh but I’ll take it on the chin, guys. When do I leave?’

‘Now. By bus.’

‘Whaaat? Are you for real?’

They were. I caught the bus from Darwin to Adelaide that afternoon and, let me tell you, the scenery ain’t that great. It’s red dirt and red rock, one road, all the way for about 3000 kilometres. Every hour or two the bus would stop and little old ladies or groups of foreign tourists would buy souvenirs – tea towels, mugs and spoons – from old dry towns that none of them would ever see again. My hair was big and blond, a spiky mullet – the Rod Stewart type of thing. I’d changed out of my Academy tracksuit into an acid-wash t-shirt and acid-wash flared jeans with a high waist. Alongside these people I was a freak. I travelled through the middle of Australia, across desert mainly, squashed up against a bus window, thinking, ‘What am I doing here?’ By the time we pulled in to Adelaide I was pretty much done with the Academy and not so far from done with cricket. Picture it. My mates were in Darwin playing and practising – I was back in Adelaide. I’d been reprimanded and told to go to the swimming pool every morning at 6 am, then to the gym for cardio, followed by weights, and then to long afternoon sessions bowling at the South Australian state squad. I was living in a pub, at 19, on my own. There was temptation around me and demons in my head. As I swam along doing lengths, the chlorine invaded my throat and stung my eyes. In a stuffy gym, I was half-hearted – no-one around me, no motivation. ‘What am I doing here?’ I kept asking myself. I did the wrong thing, yes, and I was being punished, but how was this improving my cricket? I was thinking, ‘I may as well be back in Melbourne.’ I sat tight for a few days, festering in the pub, playing pool, having a few beers, not much else. Inside, I was burning.

When the other guys got back from Darwin, Rob de Castella – one of Australia’s great athletes who was now running the Australian Institute of Sport – came to see me.

‘Shane,’ he said, like a head teacher, ‘I am very disappointed in what happened up at Darwin. I need to get to the bottom of it.’

‘Okay,’ I replied, ‘here it is. I flashed a brown eye to these girls in the pool, said some stupid things and they invited us up to their room where nothing happened and we left. Then they reported it.’

‘Yeah, I heard that, but I’m going to get to the bottom of what exactly happened.’

‘That’s exactly what happened.’

‘No, no, Shane, there’s more to it than that.’

‘No, there isn’t. I can make stuff up, if you like. What do you want to hear?

Why won’t you accept what I’m telling you, which is the truth? Ask anyone who was there, ask the girls, anyone – that is what happened.’

‘Right, well, I’ll be in touch.’

‘Okay, lovely to meet you. Thanks for coming along, Rob.’

This charade went on for another week and then, suddenly, Marto got pulled out of the Academy to play for Western Australia. The combination of Marto’s promotion and my demotion, because that’s what it was in effect, really got to me. I thought, ‘Hmm, my best mate has gone, I’m being treated like a schoolkid – I think I’ll go too.’

I rang Jim Higgs, who was a Victorian selector, and he assured me that I had a good chance of getting in the state side soon. That was the clincher. I wrote a letter to Brendan Flynn, the guy who ran the administration of the Academy, thanking him for the opportunity and saying how sorry I was that things hadn’t worked as we both hoped. But I accepted this opportunity to improve my cricket. I told him I was heading home to Melbourne with a view to getting into the state team. Then I left. He didn’t argue, and I didn’t have any regrets. So when people say I was kicked out of the Academy, it’s a lie. I decided to leave for myself. When I was chosen to play my first Test against India the next season, the Academy changed their tune. They tried to claim me as one of theirs, saying I was the first Academy-trained player to be picked for Australia. It was only half true. They even hung a picture of me on the wall there – classic! The same guys who were treating me like a kid put me up on their pedestal. Move on, Warney, I thought, move on.

I’m often asked how I got together with Terry Jenner. Well, the cricket world is pretty small and the game looks after its own. TJ had been in prison for embezzlement of funds, and now that he’d served his time, he needed something to get his teeth into. He was told there was a kid at the Academy he should go and have a look at.

I’d been having a rough time, but my rough time had nothing on his and we instantly hit it off, like peas from the same pod. I had some private sessions with him that fascinated me – he knew the art of leg-spin like no-one else. I’d begun talking cricket to someone who understood me. 

Without Terry, I wouldn’t have been the cricketer that I became. He helped me through life stuff as well as cricket. I owe him a lot. He gave me belief and direction after arriving in my life at exactly the right moment for us both. I’ll talk about TJ at length in a minute, but first, what else did I learn at the Academy? For some reason, I was obsessed with the flipper. Jack Potter taught me his version and Jim Higgs, Bob Paulsen, Richie Benaud, David Emerson and TJ all had their methods, which shows how hard it is. I remember the first time I tried it was at the Junction Oval nets at St Kilda, and it hit the top-right hand corner on the full. It went way over the batsman’s head and pinged back to him off the pole. I thought, ‘Wow, I’m not bowling that again, that’s just toooo hard.’ But of course I was fascinated and couldn’t let go. I kept at it every day, more obsessed than before. I’d go off on my own, or with my brother, up to the Tulip Street nets on the malthoid surface – a concrete base with black-painted rubber on it – and bowl leg-breaks, wrong ’uns and then hundreds of flippers.

I experimented with all the versions but settled on Jack’s with a modification of my own, positioning the ball between third finger and thumb and squeezing it out of the front of my hand. I started to land it pretty well and celebrated like a lunatic in a grade game when I got the Aussie Test batsman Julien Wiener – we called him ‘Schnitzel’ – with a beauty. It was my first wicket with the flipper actually – so I was very happy! A similar ball knocked over Alec Stewart at the Gabba four years later. From such moments …

(Speaking of nicknames, Aussies come up with some very good ones. Schnitzel was one, but my favourite is ‘Ferfuck’ for David Saker. You’ll work it out.)

Learning at Last

Academy resignation accepted, I went back to Melbourne and within a few weeks was making my first-class debut at the Junction Oval for Victoria against Western Australia. Guess what, Marto was in the WA side. Simon O’Donnell was Victorian captain and Les Stillman coach, and they took me out for dinner at the Marine Hotel. I ordered two white rolls and a bowl of hot chips. O’Donnell said, ‘Are you serious?’ I said yep, before stuffing the chips between the rolls and adding loads of sauce, salt and vinegar.

O’Donnell, or ‘Scuba’ as he was called, was great with me. Patient, thoughtful and firm. I respect him for the role he played in me staying with the Vics when I was approached by New South Wales around that time. He was straight with me, no bullshit, and he made me truly believe in my skills and spirit, while always looking to help me get the best out of them. Mind you, he grassed a simple catch when Graeme Wood got a leading edge to a decent leg-break in one of my first overs on debut and just threw it back, saying, ‘Well bowled, mate, bad luck.’ ‘Oh okay,’ I thought. ‘No worries. I’ve only been working on that moment for two years. Thanks, Scube!’ Pretty laidback guy, the Scube. Woody went on to smash us all over the park. In the end, it was big Tom Moody who had the dubious honour of being my first wicket in first-class cricket.

(Dennis Lillee was the team manager for Western Australia at the time. I’d never met Lillee – who is such an absolute legend. At tea on the second day I asked Marto if I could meet him, but Marto said he slept from tea to stumps so he’d be right for the night ahead. ‘He drinks hard,’ said Marto, ‘has fun with the guys and tells incredible stories, so we give him one session off a day.’ And little starstruck me thought, ‘Yes, he is a legend!’)

In August 1990 I was picked to go to the West Indies with the Australian Young Cricketers, which was a great experience if no great success story. Then, in September 1991, I was chosen to go to Zimbabwe on an Australia B tour that Mark Taylor captained.

Zimbabwe was a great country, ruined by its president, Robert Mugabe, but thankfully it’s making a comeback now that he’s out of the way. The Zimbos could play alright. They were hugely competitive blokes and magnificent hosts after hours. We took a strong team and all of us made good mates over there. I kept nailing their big-hitting all-rounder, Iain Butchart, with the flipper. He was as hopeless at reading it as Daryll Cullinan. He kind of smiled at me in his stance before I came in, then I let it go and knocked him over. Simple! We called it the ‘Butchy ball’ for a while but it didn’t stick.

Tubby was a top-class captain and it was obvious that he’d lead Australia soon enough. I picked up 7/49 in the second first-class game, the first time I’d done anything on the international stage. It gave me a huge sense of satisfaction. The pitches in both Bulawayo and Harare suited me well and I certainly got more from that trip than from the West Indies a year earlier. Although one or two of the guys had already played Test cricket, that Zimbabwe trip saw the foundation of the new Australian team – Taylor, Steve Waugh, Tom Moody, Michael Bevan, Paul Reiffel and me. Our liaison officer was a guy called Russell Tiffin. I drank ‘soapies’ with him most nights – cane, lime, soda and Robinson’s lemon barley to wash it down real quick. He was a great bloke who later became an international umpire, and whenever I hit a batsman on the pads and it was anything like close, I was up, and Russell, more often than not, raised that finger of his. I reckon those happy nights at the Harare Sports Club had given me a better than even chance!

John Benaud, Richie’s brother, was the manager of the tour, an absolute beauty of a guy. We heard that he came up with the word ‘sledging’, as applied to cricket, in a Shield game in the early 1970s when he was having a real go at a player he disliked in the opposition. They came off at the lunch break and one of his team-mates said, ‘Hey, JB, did you get out of bed the wrong side this morning, mate? You’re about as subtle as a sledgehammer.’ Hence the word sledging. He was pretty shy when we asked him about it, so we were never certain how true it was. Ripper bloke, JB.

After the Zimbabwe tour, my confidence started to grow. The bad experience of the Academy could be weighed against a better than average start to state cricket and backing from the Aussie selectors. The incentives were clear. Keep at it, keep believing in yourself and all things are possible. I noticed that cricket was beginning to match footy in those dreams of mine.

One thing I’d picked up during the days of World Series Cricket was how exciting the game could be for anyone with the personality to break the mould and give the crowd something for their buck. My own playing experiences had allowed me to sense the hidden elements of cricket, subtleties that don’t immediately come over on television. I loved the intense competition that made up the conflict between bat and ball and the showmanship that came with it. That’s what started to do it for me – the head-to-heads, the one-on-ones. We all need our boat rocked and this question about who out-thinks and outlasts who is the crux of the game and the bit that most interests me.

Though I was angry at the way I’d been treated at the Academy, I’d learnt enough to realise that I could make more of my talent. In a way, that long bus journey from Darwin gave me time to work out what I really wanted. Hell, I was playing state cricket a few weeks later, so no-one could say I gave up: far from it, I got stuck in. My dreams were changing. My appetite for cricket increased and my ambition went up – not one level but about five.

I’d been in the state squad for a couple of years, been to the Academy, toured  the West Indies and Zimbabwe, won the flag in grade cricket and played four Shield games. I’d done okay, showing glimpses of what I could do – but not better than that, to be honest. Then the lightning bolt.

It was Christmas 1991. I was at the Boxing Day Test with my mate Dean Waugh – watching his brother Mark – and bumped into Ian McDonald, the Australian team manager. He saw the three pies under my right arm and the beer under my left and said, ‘Go easy, mate, you might be playing in Sydney.’ Yeah, right, Macca, nice one. What happened the next morning shocked the life out of me. Macca called and said the selectors had picked me in the squad for the New Year Test against India. Oh my God!

Yes, that was the ambition. But not yet! Not nearly.

Straya

Imagine it for a moment. The kid with the football dream, the bogan at heart, told he was going to play cricket for Australia. Not much floors me, but that call did. I felt like I was out of my league. Talk about daunting. I didn’t know many of my team-mates – I mean, I’d been copying most of them in the backyard the week before. You know, doing impressions and commentating their performances. Now I was shaking their hand and changing alongside them. I felt awkward, disorientated, exposed.

Ravi Shastri smashed me all over the park; it was sort of embarrassing. I didn’t bowl long hops or full tosses, not many anyway. I bowled mainly pretty good balls, but got hammered everywhere. At that stage I didn’t really have a plan – I just bowled and waited for the batsman to make a mistake. The art of spin bowling is the real key – more on that later.

I dropped Ravi – a caught and bowled chance when he had 66 – which might have made a huge difference. Instead, he got a double hundred. It went from bad to worse, as Sachin got 140-odd as well. He was about 12 years old, looked eight and smashed me.

My figures were 1/150. I felt stupid and wanted a hole to disappear into, but that’s the thing about Test cricket – there is no hole. You’re stuck with it for up to five days and every bastard is watching and has something to say. We had to fight to save the game and no-one does that better than Allan Border. I was in with him at the end, facing seven balls to survive, so at least I contributed to something. I was really struck by Border’s authority and determination. He seemed to embody much of what Australia stands for and, immediately, I felt comfortable around him. AB was a great leader, as I was to find out soon enough.

I played the next Test in Adelaide too, another horror, and yet I had immediately liked the taste of Test match cricket and seen the attraction of its unique and very special appeal. In short, my imagination had been fired. ‘Dream, baby, dream,’ as the song goes.

There was definitely something in the air and I wanted to know more about it. I needed a kindred spirit, someone like-minded to guide my journey. So I found a teacher, and he helped to change my life. As I said, I had a taste and now I was hungry for knowledge.