The Australia tour changed my outlook towards cricket. Playing for the country was a massive honour, but it was not the be all and end all of cricket. I had to stay in the present and enjoy the challenges and charms of the first-class game, not merely use it as a stepping stone to more widely recognised honours. If, in the process of helping my team climb the rungs, I did enough to catch the eye of the national selectors, fantastic.

Armed with this attitude, I set about my goal of steering Hyderabad to the Ranji Trophy title. For all the talent that Hyderabad had thrown up with stunning regularity, we had just one title to show, in 1986–87, under MV Narasimha Rao’s captaincy. We were always there or thereabouts, invariably making it to the knockout stages and often battling it out in the semi-final, but we were not spoken of in the same breath as Mumbai or Karnataka or Delhi because we didn’t win titles.

It was this anomaly that I was desperate to correct. Obviously, several things need to go right for a team to go all the way, and you need the personnel that can drive the dream. I sincerely believed that the side we had in 1999–2000 was the most talented, committed and driven Hyderabad team that I had been a part of. When I broke into the Hyderabad team in 1993, we had a plethora of extremely skilled players. But there was no awareness about the importance of fitness, which was soon to sweep the cricketing landscape. Working out was not high on anyone’s list of priorities. A few relaxed, cursory laps around the ground was the only concession. The players relied more on cricketing fitness, while net sessions were devoted to bashing every ball out of sight rather than working out the kinks and addressing specific problem areas.

Arshad Ayub was the captain back in 1993, and he tried his best to instil discipline and an uncompromising work ethic among his colleagues. But we didn’t have a trainer, so our fitness routines were basic. We ran two laps of the Gymkhana Grounds, followed by five 40-metre sprints from the pitch to the square boundary. After this, we brought out two mats, the players were divided, and Arshad bhai led the way in stretching and core exercises, accompanied by muffled laughs and the odd wisecrack.

Once we got this 15-minute session out of the way, it was time for breakfast—bananas, eggs, milk and tea—after which we had nets. Midway through the nets, we would adjourn for a break marked by tea from Paradise restaurant, along with samosas. Another extended net session, and we were done. We would have been at the ground for close to five hours and in the end, it would have amounted to only 20 minutes of batting!

During camps and at team meetings, Arshad bhai exhorted us to look beyond Hyderabad and aspire to play for India. He asked us to emulate our ambitious peers in other formidable Ranji Trophy teams—Mumbai, Delhi and Karnataka. He urged us to walk the extra mile if we were desirous of greater things. Arshad bhai once sat me down and recalled how much he had to struggle to first get into the Indian team, and then to stay there. For an 18-year-old, it was precisely the tonic required. Arshad bhai was instrumental in putting the fight into me, as a batsman and a cricketer.

There was a perception in Indian circles that Hyderabad cricket meant fun and games, that the players weren’t really serious about pursuing a career in the sport. The feeling I got, especially when I started to play for India A and then for India, was that Hyderabadis were perceived to be soft and laidback. Perhaps it had something to do with how the team reacted to defeat; maybe we didn’t mope and sulk and openly show our disappointment following losses, but that didn’t mean we didn’t hurt. The Hyderabad school of cricket has revolved around playing the game extremely hard and with total passion in the middle, but leaving it behind once we exit the white line. This approach was misconstrued as indifference, which is why many of the Hyderabad players didn’t get as many chances at the zonal level or against visiting teams as they should have. In my first season with Hyderabad, we had three accomplished, senior batsmen who had totally different styles and attitudes. Abdul Azeem was a dasher at the top of the order, blessed with a wide repertoire of strokes that he played with gay abandon. MV Sridhar was the ultimate accumulator, an expert at occupying the crease and grinding attacks into the dust. Vivek Jaisimha was flashy and flamboyant, brilliant to watch because of an innate grace that lay in his genes. Kanwaljit Singh and Venkatapathi Raju are two of the best spinners I have ever come across, period. Then, there were the hard-working contributors such as RA Swaroop and MV Ramanamurthy, who walked that extra mile to maximise their abilities. Nothing meant more to them than doing well for Hyderabad, and they produced vintage performances. However, they were never talked about as often or with as much excitement as players from other parts of the country who had only 60 per cent of their ability and 80 per cent of their commitment.

Hyderabad cricket had been labelled as a fun-loving, happy-go-lucky entity from the 1960s. The rest of the country struggled to see it in any other light even though the men who had given Hyderabad that identity were all brilliant performers and wonderful readers of the game, including the legendary Tiger Pataudi and ML Jaisimha.

Players of my generation were in awe of these stalwarts. We had all heard stories of their charisma and crowd-pulling power. Our seniors had painted vivid pictures of their style and chutzpah on the field of play, and the tremendous fun they had off it. They played cricket because they loved it, and they were extremely proficient at what they did. Just because they were not overtly aggressive didn’t mean anything. Once the day’s play was over, teammates and opposition alike would assemble either at Jaisimha sir’s house or at a club, and discuss cricket over a beer or two. GR Viswanath sir, one of my heroes, has often spoken of how much he learnt in his formative cricketing days from merely listening to these giants talk cricket. I was fortunate that, early in my career, I had the good fortune of interacting with Jaisimha sir. He left an indelible impact with his incisive dissection of the game and his gift of cutting to the chase. I would be less than honest if I said that all this was not playing on my mind as I returned to the Hyderabad setup after being dropped following the Mumbai Test against South Africa in early 2000. I was hurt, disappointed and angry, but I also told myself that I would channel these emotions to serve Hyderabad cricket as best as I could. An India comeback was the farthest thing from my mind. I had no intention of trying to force the selectors’ hands, even if I piled up the runs.

I have always believed in setting goals, no matter what level I played at. Individual goals, team goals. The goal for the 1999–2000 season was straightforward—win the Ranji Trophy for Hyderabad. Nothing else mattered. The season had gone well for me, both before the tour of Australia when I made hundreds in the South Zone league against Goa and Andhra, and before the Mumbai Test, for which I warmed up with another century against Bihar in a Super League game. Now I was available to Hyderabad for the rest of the season, and I wanted to make that count.

Admittedly, I wasn’t exactly brimming with joy when I returned to the Hyderabad dressing room. It wasn’t so much that I had been dropped, it was the lack of communication and being summarily cast aside like a used rag that angered me no end.

My Hyderabad teammates welcomed me back with open arms, but also with empathy and understanding. I had grown as a cricketer in front of Arshad bhai, Kanwal bhai and Venkat, and they took it upon themselves to lift my spirts. Arshad bhai took me aside and said, ‘Laxman, you have always done well for Hyderabad, and that is what has taken you to the Indian team. Forget about India for now, focus on Hyderabad. You have to play long innings and be the man around whom the batting revolves. And the only way to do that is to not look at the scoreboard but to just bat for long periods. Don’t go into your shell, express yourself. Only then will you be successful. Play to the merit of the ball, take everything else out of the equation. Do what you did when you were a young lad, enjoy yourself.’ It was simple advice but it made a lot of sense; it was also very comforting, given the mental space I was in.

Kanwal bhai and Venkat had similar things to say. ‘Remember, the reason you started to play cricket was because it was fun. Don’t allow negative emotions to take control of you.’ Their patience and understanding at a difficult time immediately cleared my head. These were men I looked up to, and to have their backing meant the world to me.

It helped, too, that I had a bunch of friends the same age as I was, who were also in the team. There was Parth Satwalekar, my childhood buddy. There was A Nanda Kishore, the phlegmatic opening batsman. Narenderpal Singh, the fun-loving fast bowler who was always ready with a joke. And Daniel Manohar, the elegant left-hander with a bright future. They knew that I needed tough love. And they didn’t hold back.

Our first game on my return was in New Delhi against Railways. I had been reserved and aloof at the practice sessions, extremely serious and still trying to come to grips with my disappointment. My body language exuded ‘touch-me-not’. But my friends refused to walk on eggshells around me. We went out for a meal the night before the game, and the message they put out to me was that while they were all supportive of me, they wanted me to forget about what had happened with the Indian team and focus on what lay ahead. ‘What you should be doing now is helping all of us achieve our dream of winning the trophy,’ they said. As the evening progressed, I felt more and more relaxed. I could feel the tenseness evaporating, and soon I was actively participating in the conversation. I shared my India experiences with the guys, I told them how the Australian tour had impressed on me the importance of respecting our performances in domestic cricket. ‘Being a first-class cricketer is also a big thing,’ I said. To which Parth replied, ‘Welcome back, Lachi!’ Until the mid-1990s, we in Hyderabad went with the flow, relying on our skills.

It wasn’t until 1995, when Ramakanth came into the team as a physio and trainer, that our work ethic changed. Ramakanth was himself an athlete and trained at the Lal Bahadur Shastri Stadium. The more I watched him work out, the more impressed I was, and I soon began to train alongside him. I was keen that he should join the HCA, and found an ally in Radheshyam Sharma, who ran the Continental Cricket Club, one of the teams in the HCA league. Once Rama came in, our training sessions were a lot more structured, even if several of the players had no real understanding of fitness.

Ramakanth and Azzu bhai together changed our attitude to our bodies. Azzu bhai was so busy with his international commitments that he could play no more than a match or two for Hyderabad each season. Whenever he was with the team, we watched his routine carefully and tried to follow it for the rest of the season. For instance, he did 2000 sit-ups, and once he left, we copied that. But when Azzu bhai came back the next year, he laughed at us for those 2000 situps, pointing out that 200 were more than enough!

I hung on to his every word, every action. I watched him prepare—gear in place and shipshape. His commitment was astonishing, and he taught me the value of maximising time at practice. When he practised with us between his India duties, he was done in an hour and a half without skipping any aspect—40 minutes of fitness, 30 minutes of batting, 20 minutes of catching and fielding. He would still have time for banter and advice, but the intensity of his workouts appealed to me. When I became a regular in the Indian team and occasionally joined my Hyderabad mates for practice, I made sure that I put in an intense 90 minutes instead of ending up with 20 minutes of batting after a five-hour session. Once I made my India debut, there was a sweeping change in the mindset of the Hyderabad players. Several of my young teammates now believed that if they worked hard enough and dreamt big, they too could play for the country. ‘If Laxman can, why can’t I?’ became the motto.

Being with the Indian team had exposed me to different training methods, and I wanted to share them with my friends. All of us desired to make Hyderabad the best team in India, and towards that end, we embarked on a rigorous training schedule from the summer of 1997–98. I had gleaned enough from Paddy Upton, the fitness trainer for the South African team, and we put schedules in place accordingly. We were to have two fitness sessions every day, apart from skill sessions at the nets, beginning as early as five in the morning. Some 20 km outside Hyderabad, in Ammaguda village, we did steptraining at the 470-step climb to reach the famous dargah, and we did the trip four, sometimes five times in a row. Halfway through, we would double over in pain and start throwing up, but we didn’t allow that to be a deterrent. Other days, we trooped across to the Mahendra Hills for hill-running. Together we practised yoga; we all learnt transcendental meditation. We did everything possible to become fitter cricketers. We believed Hyderabad could win the Ranji Trophy, and wanted to tick every preparatory box to make that possible.

The Hyderabad dressing room was a great example of camaraderie and bonhomie. There was no senior-junior disparity. Everyone was fair game, and the biggest pranksters were Doc Sridhar, Kanwal bhai, Rajesh Yadav and Venkat. Every day they would pick a target and play practical jokes—sometimes they didn’t even spare each other—and that immediately lightened the mood. Any youngster who came in anxious was quickly made to feel at home. Doc was a wonderful captain and a great man-manager. I haven’t met anyone more accomplished at taking youngsters under his wing and getting them to play above themselves. The best captain I have played under, Doc was also the backbone of the team with his untiring occupation of the crease and his love for big scores.

Whenever we played our home games at the beautiful Gymkhana Grounds  in Secunderabad, the lunch spread wouldn’t have been out of place at a wedding. We all tucked into the rich food—I remember observing the relish with which my teammates devoured their biryani—and it was only when I started to play for India A and Board President’s XIs, and then India, that I realised the need to be disciplined about diet, particularly on match days. Several of my most hilarious memories of the Hyderabad dressing room revolve around lunch. While some of my mates were in the habit of picking up a fresh plate for every new helping, still others would leave the field just as the interval came up, to ensure that they weren’t denied the juiciest pieces of meat!

We youngsters delighted in being a part of this wonderful setup, but somewhere along the line, we stopped having fun once we got into the middle. We were so focused on the game that we forgot how to enjoy ourselves, and we weren’t even aware of this until Jaisimha sir pointed it out to us when he took over as the coach at the start of the 1996–97 season.

‘You guys don’t understand the meaning of cricket, of being cricketers,’ he said in his rich, deep, captivating tone. ‘You are taking cricket way too seriously. It is a game—you have to love it, not be afraid of it. Cricketers are supposed to be bindaas, flamboyant. Look at you all, approaching it as if it’s a matter of life and death.’

He was a patient man with a vast reservoir of knowledge that we could all tap into. Over long sessions, he stressed the importance of not being obsessed with cricket. It was a valuable lesson; the line between passion and obsession is a thin but crucial one and if you are not careful, the joy can quickly go out of your game.

During our travels, by train as was the norm then, or when we played, Jaisimha sir was the centre of attraction. People magically appeared by his side, for a shake of his hand and an autograph. Some of them reminded him of the knocks he had played or recalled one of the many incidents involving him and his mates. It was obvious that people were fond of him. Once the day’s play was over, he regaled us with stories. With a drink in hand, he reeled off anecdotes, most of them about cricket. He talked about his friends (the entire team!), about their preparation and their approach, but seldom about himself.

Jaisimha sir had been a giant in international cricket, and was much loved and revered in Hyderabad. We were all in awe of him, but he had no airs. Aware that we would be intimidated by his stature, he went out of his way to make everyone feel comfortable. He was always a step ahead of the game, and even for us newbies, it wasn’t hard to see what a star he must have been during his playing days.

When I was dropped from the Indian team, Jaisimha sir worked hard to restore my confidence. He understood my psyche and knew which buttons to push when. He suggested subtle changes to my technique without advocating a total overhaul, and allowed me to try out these alterations and adopt them, but only when I felt comfortable. He was a guide and a mentor more than a coach, ‘Uncle’ to all of us and one of the warmest, most giving souls that I have met. In March 1999, after India’s Test matches against Pakistan at home and the one-off Test in Colombo against Sri Lanka, I returned to play for Hyderabad. I hadn’t made a lot of runs when we travelled to Baroda for a Ranji Trophy Super League fixture. I was batting in one of the two nets, and clearly struggling. After watching me for five minutes, Jaisimha sir stopped the bowler in his run-up and pulled me out of the nets. He took me for a walk around the ground, and gently told me that he too had been a reluctant opener for the Indian team. During that walk, he reminded me of what I had done when I was successful. When he took over as coach, he had asked me about my preparations towards getting a big score. I had told him that I didn’t look at the scoreboard or worry about the runs. I just played session by session, I played time, and enjoyed the process of batting long.

‘Are you doing that now?’ he asked. ‘Your mind is wavering a lot, you are thinking about too many things. You are not having fun. You are placing too much emphasis on technique, on doing well for India. You are not watching the ball closely, so you are not reacting quickly.’

Having broached the mental aspect, he then made a technical point. ‘If you don’t watch the ball closely, not only do you move late, your head tends to fall. That leaves you susceptible to the ball coming in.’

Then he threw down a challenge. ‘It doesn’t matter how many runs you get,’ he said. ‘My challenge as a coach to an India player is—can you bat the entire day and not get out? I don’t care about the runs you score, come back not out at the end of the day. And remember, the changes in your mindset and technique are very minute. Don’t pay too much attention to minute changes— register the message and then forget about it.’ Jaisimha sir handled different players differently. He felt I would best rise to a challenge. 

We completed our walk around the ground and he asked me to go back to the nets and have fun. The next 20 minutes were awesome. I experienced the satisfaction of hitting the ball well, and felt an upsurge in confidence. After Baroda posted 439, I got to bat midway through the second day. With Jaisimha sir’s challenge still fresh in my mind, I didn’t even go looking for runs. I batted on until being dismissed by Swaroop, my former Hyderabad teammate. I occupied the crease for 609 minutes, faced 400 balls, and made 219 with 27 fours. Runs against my name, the credit against Jaisimha sir’s.

Whenever he was on a cricket field, he was only in whites, neatly pressed and spotless. He used to say that cricket was his life, it was his love. ‘I respect the game, that’s why I always wear my whites. I feel very proud to be able to don the whites.’ His untimely demise in 1999 left a huge void and deeply affected those of us who were involved with Hyderabad cricket.

When I made my Ranji debut in February 1993, Jyothi Prasad sir was the coach, and Manohar sir took over from him. That made my transition from a club cricketer to a first-class cricketer smooth, because both of them had been a part of my journey at the St John’s coaching camp, and knew my game as well as anyone else. Later, Vijay Mohanraj sir took charge, before Jaisimha sir, and he brought a whole new dimension to our thinking.

He had played in Mumbai, alongside some of the biggest names in Indian cricket, and he sought to instil that ‘never-give-up’ attitude in Hyderabad. Himself a top batsman, he emphasised batting long. The khadoos approach that is synonymous with Mumbai became a part of my kitbag from the time Vijay sir became the coach, but he was also clear that I must not compromise on flair.

In 1999–2000, Arshad bhai the coach managed what Arshad bhai the captain could not. While he had stressed on fitness during his playing days, he walked the talk as coach by bringing in a specialist trainer. We started to have intense sessions, and soon enough, our fitness standards improved visibly. With a generational shift, the players also became more informed and disciplined. For Hyderabad cricket, that was a seismic change.

The shift happened in other avenues too. Doc had been the fulcrum around which the batting had revolved for so long, and imperceptibly, I joined him as a key cog in the Hyderabad batting wheel. Among the young guns, I probably became the unofficial leader after I played for India. When I was away on international duty, NP, Nanda and Vanka Pratap took over the leadership role— we had all started our careers when Arshad bhai was the captain—and the four of us became the bridge between generations. Once Doc and Azeem bhai retired, Daniel Manohar came in, other youngsters arrived, and we became default mentors even though we were very young ourselves. We were all driven, we all wanted Hyderabad to become the best side it could be, if not the best team in the country.

I have always held that of all the Hyderabad teams that I played in, the batch of 1999–2000 was the best. I don’t say that just because of our performance in the Ranji Trophy that season. There was great quality in the side, but there was also steel and aggression, which you could see in the body language of the players. We weren’t loud or boorish, but we exuded intent and desire. Everyone was internally driven to do their best for Hyderabad and I believe we did well because we were so focused on our task. The team was expressive and unafraid to show that it was up for a fight, and every tough situation threw up a new hero. No one was satisfied with one or two good performances, everyone wanted to achieve excellence.

By then, Jaisimha sir had passed away. We wanted to win the trophy for him. If we needed any extra incentive at all, it was this. There was a purpose in everything we did, and we were quietly confident that we had the mettle to go all the way.

As the season unfolded, I settled down to my task of driving the team forward. I had gotten a grip on my disappointment. That wasn’t going to be a distraction. Individual milestones didn’t matter anymore. I hardly acknowledged a half-century, and if I got a hundred, I looked at it as just the first step taken. Midway through the season, Doc announced his retirement and Azzu bhai was away on India duty, so I felt I owed it to the team to shoulder additional responsibility and set myself up as the point around which the batting unit, if not the entire team, revolved.

The runs flowed, and attractively at that, even if I say so myself. We marched to the quarter-final where we ran into Uttar Pradesh in cold Kanpur, on a seaming track against an experienced domestic attack. I had to knuckle down and grind it out, and I did so for seven hours to make 128 out of 291. Uttar Pradesh obviously were more at home, and even though Kanwal bhai got six wickets, they replied with 362. We had no option but to erase the deficit and put up a sizeable target with elimination staring us in the face. I had to be less circumspect and lead the way, and I was delighted with how I responded. Boundaries flowed off my bat as I raced to 177 off just 241 deliveries and remained unbeaten. Our declaration at 381 for 5 gave us enough time to have a go at them, and this time Venkat responded with a six-for as we pulled off an excellent win by 92 runs.

It gave us the boost we needed going into the semi-final against a strong Karnataka side in Bangalore. Anil and Rahul were both unavailable, but Karnataka still had a tremendous attack in Venkatesh Prasad, Dodda Ganesh, Mansur Ali Khan and Sunil Joshi. Their batting was also mighty—J Arunkumar, Barrington Rowland, the prolific Vijay Bharadwaj, Thilak Naidu. We had a fight on our hands, but we believed we had the team to get past them, even in their own den.

I was eyeing a big one, taking the onus on myself even though Azzu bhai was also in the eleven. In a bid to impose myself, I stepped out and took on Joshi, popping up a simple catch to mid-on. Somehow, Barrington put it down. I should have been back in the hut for 30. Instead, I would go on to make my highest first-class score. On such small passages do fortunes change dramatically.

After being dropped, I realised I had made a mistake, not in my attitude but in my shot selection. I told myself that I would play my natural and attacking game with the bigger goal in mind, and that I wouldn’t allow myself to get bogged down. Especially against Joshi, I stepped out repeatedly and hit him with and against the turn, along the ground and in the air. I raised my bat to the dressing room as I ticked off the milestones—50, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300. Azzu bhai too made a hundred, and I thoroughly enjoyed batting with him.

I went to stumps on day two at 346, within striking distance of Doc’s alltime Hyderabad record of 366. It was impossible not to think of that number overnight—till date, it remains the third highest first-class score by an Indian. When we arrived at the ground on the third morning, I was stunned to see Doc, recently retired, outside our dressing room. He had predicted a very good career for me when I was dismissed for zero on my Ranji debut, and now, he had driven through the night from Hyderabad because he wanted to see me break his record. It touched me beyond words. A pleasurable pain ran through my body. Doc had been an older brother and mentor, and his appearance after a 550-km overnight drive signified to me the bonding and closeness that was such an endearing trait of Hyderabad cricket.

Destiny, though, has its own way of functioning, and Doc’s record remained intact as I was dismissed on day three for 353. I was too exhausted to be disappointed, and only wished I had made more runs to ensure we put the total beyond Karnataka’s reach. In the event, 711 proved more than sufficient as we powered into the final.

Like the quarters and the semis, the final too was an away game for us, against a redoubtable Mumbai side further fortified by Sachin’s presence. It was my first face-to-face with Sachin since the Mumbai Test.

He walked up to me on the morning of the game when both teams were at the ground doing warm-ups and we had a long chat. By then, he had quit the Indian captaincy. He was aware of the string of scores I had pieced together that season, and encouraged me to keep working hard. ‘You will be back soon, mark my words,’ he said. I knew he wanted the best for me; when I had been dropped for the Bangalore Test against South Africa, Sachin himself had seemed helpless.

During the course of our long conversation, he kept reminding me of my 167, he reflected on my tears in Johannesburg in 1997 when I broke my finger. The Sydney hundred, he said, was a reflection of my true potential. His words were sincere and well-meaning, but I was not thinking of getting back into the Indian team. I heard him out because of the enormous respect I had for him. I wanted to tell him that my runs for Hyderabad were not comeback runs, they had a bigger purpose. As much as I appreciated his sentiments, whatever he said was not going to make any difference to my state of mind. I knew I was in an excellent space, having a grand time with my friends and chasing my dream of winning the Ranji Trophy for my state. Thoughts of a comeback were, at best, in the deepest recesses of my mind.

Those five days of the Ranji final were the hottest of my cricketing life. It was towards the end of April, and even the sea breeze that rippled through the Wankhede was searing. The humidity was draining. We got Sachin cheaply (he only made 53!) as Mumbai piled up 376. After losing two quick wickets, Azzu bhai and I got together in a rescue act. We soon got on top of Ajit Agarkar, Abey Kuruvilla and Paras Mhambrey, and the runs came rapidly. My contribution in our stand of 89 was a dominating 46 when I was run out after a mix-up. Azzu bhai played the ball towards shortish mid-on and set off. I should have turned down the non-existent single, but responded to his call and was well short of my ground.

Back in the changing room, I was cursing myself for not scoring more, for again being run out. I knew that once Mumbai took the lead, there was no way back for us. Sadly, no one else apart from Azzu bhai topped 30 and we were bowled out for 195. Sachin made a second-innings century and batted us out of the game. I rounded off the final with another hundred—my eighth of the season —but there was a hollow ring to it.

The second-innings 111 boosted my Ranji Trophy runs for the 1999–2000 season to 1,415, an average of 108 per innings. To this date, it remains the most runs in a single edition. Records, of course, are meant to be broken, and it won’t be long before someone goes past that number.

It was a memorable season—for reasons good and not so good. It transformed me, and it exposed me to the formula for batting success, no matter what the level or the opposition. The one lesson that stayed with me forever was to not look at the scoreboard. The other was to play more shots and not allow the bowlers to settle down. And the most significant was to never ever be satisfied at reaching a milestone. A fifty or a hundred was only a stepping stone, nothing more than that.

Bitter disappointment stemmed from being so close to the title, yet finishing so far behind. We had believed we were good enough to go all the way, that we were no less a side than Mumbai, Karnataka and Delhi, the acknowledged powerhouses. We had realised that we could not rely on individual brilliance, we had to fire as a unit. And that’s exactly what we had done, in every game bar the final.

I don’t have many cricketing regrets, but at the top of that short list is not winning the Ranji Trophy. It was with that goal in mind that I played one more season after retiring from Test cricket in 2012. Whatever I am is because of Hyderabad cricket, and by winning the Ranji Trophy, I wanted to give something back to my city in my own way. But that wasn’t to be. The Ranji title will remain a dream unfulfilled.