In my late teens, as the battle between the dream of becoming an international cricketer and the goal of being a doctor intensified, I made a pact with myself. If I did go on to play for the country and if I was good enough to keep playing, I would be a cricketer till the age of 35. I would then retire, complete my MBBS and become a doctor. If things panned out as planned, I would be able to fulfil both my passions.

I turned 35 in November 2009, but I put off a decision on retirement because I had hardly played international cricket for the first four years and believed I still had plenty to offer. We had a packed year of Test cricket to look forward to in 2010—a tour of Bangladesh, followed by South Africa at home, Sri Lanka away, Australia in our own backyard, and then South Africa away in December for a three-match series.

The year started disappointingly when I split the webbing in my left hand while taking a catch at slip off Ishant’s bowling in the first Test in Chittagong in January. It was the first time I had sustained an injury of this nature, and despite physio Nitin Patel’s advice, I wanted to play in the second game in Dhaka. I was trying to bat through the stiches and the pain when Sachin came up at practice in Dhaka the day before the Test and said, ‘A split webbing isn’t a small injury, I’ve endured it. I understand you are keen to play, but be smart and don’t take a risk. The webbing could split again, and you have to be ready for the series against South Africa.’ Nitin had tried to convey the same message but I was adamant until Sachin pointed out the pitfalls of putting myself at risk.

I returned to Hyderabad, disappointed but also determined to use the time to work on my fitness before the Tests against South Africa in February. The doctor had told me I would be fine in 10 days, and I did feel better when I joined the team in Nagpur in early February for the first Test. I had eased into batting with throw-downs back in Hyderabad, but during the first practice session in Nagpur, I felt severe jarring and discomfort when I played the fast bowlers. I was losing my grip because I had no strength in my top hand; Gary Kirsten told me I would be better off sitting out the Test because of the presence of the pacy Dale Steyn and Morne Morkel in the South African attack. Rahul was also out of the series, having fractured his jaw in the Dhaka Test while batting, so we had two debutants in Nagpur—S Badrinath and Wriddhiman Saha. Originally, Rohit Sharma had been scheduled to make his debut, but he twisted his ankle while playing soccer in the warm-up on the morning of the Test, so Saha was drafted in at the last minute.

We were overrun by Steyn, who put on a memorable exhibition of reverse swing. Viru scored a hundred in the first innings and Sachin scored a century in the second, but Steyn fired us out with 10 wickets for the match, playing the lead role in South Africa’s innings win. I watched helplessly from the sidelines, though I took heart from the improvement in my condition. By the third day of the Test, I was pain-free and looking forward to the second and final game, which we had to win to retain our No. 1 ranking.

By a happy coincidence, the match was in Kolkata, where the team and I had had many delightful outings. However, we were in for a rude shock as Alviro Petersen, on debut, and Hashim Amla put on more than 200 for the second wicket after Graeme Smith won the toss. South Africa were on course for 400-plus when Zak struck decisive blows after tea. From 218 for one, they were shot out for 296. It was an incredible effort from our bowlers on a good batting strip.

The most difficult batting periods in Kolkata are first thing in the morning, when the early start allows the quicker bowlers to exploit the moisture in the air, and late in the evening, when the breeze wafts in. Viru got us off to a feverish start, and even though we lost two wickets in quick time, he and Sachin made their second hundreds of the series and took the South Africans apart. However, with stumps half an hour away on the second evening, we suffered a mini collapse. The two centurions were followed back to the pavilion by Badrinath, who was beaten and bowled by a massive reverse swinger from Steyn. I truly felt for Badri. He had waited a long time to play Test cricket and had done well on debut with a half-ton, playing the reversing ball with confidence and assurance. However, this time around, he had no chance. The light was fading rapidly, and he was very early in his innings. I suspect he had problems sighting the ball. I don’t think it was the pace and swing as much as the light that did him in. To counter the reversing ball at a pace one doesn’t get to play often would have been difficult at the best of times. In poor light, it was next to impossible. Unfortunately, that was his last Test innings.

Amit Mishra, the nightwatchman, and I saw off a tense eight deliveries to stumps, and Mishy held his own on the third morning when South Africa made a tactical blunder. Despite the huge amounts of reverse that Steyn, Morkel, Wayne Parnell and Jacques Kallis were getting, Smith opted for the harder second new ball, against which batting was far easier. Mishy frustrated South Africa for nearly an hour, and then MS bustled in, all aggression. He was in the best batting form of his life, and he ripped the attack to shreds while I was content to keep ticking over. As we pressed the accelerator in the quest for quick runs before the declaration, MS smashed Parnell flat over cover. The ball thudded into the fence, one-bounce, before the sweeper had time to react. Had the ball gone straight to him, it could have done serious damage.

When MS declared, we had put on 259. He was unbeaten on 132, I had reached 143, our total was 643, and the lead 347. We had more than two days to force victory, draw the series and maintain our top ranking, all of which seemed a formality.

The elements almost ruined our plans. Less than 35 overs of play was possible on day four due to a combination of rain and bad light so that going into the final day, we still required seven wickets with the unflappable Amla going strong. He continued to defy us for 500 minutes in making 123 not out, but was running out of support. More than an hour and a quarter remained when Morkel, the last man, joined Amla, and we were already thinking of the celebrations, but then started one of the most gripping passages of play in a year full of drama and tension.Morkel was solid in defence, Amla typically unmoved, and we were beginning to feel that victory was slipping away. We were still only one ball away from our desired goal, but each defensive stroke added to our frustration. Amid the edginess around him, MS was as calm as ever, directing the proceedings with confidence, and Bhajji responded by trapping Morkel in front for his fifth wicket of the innings. South Africa were no more than an over and a half away from safety, but our desperation carried the day in the end. A century in my first game back from injury was a personal milestone, and the victory a more satisfying outcome. But by the end of the game, I was completely drained. I had no energy, even though I had only played two Tests in two and a half months, and was happy to be returning to Hyderabad. I remember  telling Sachin, ‘Hats off to you. You have already played four Tests this year, and now you are part of the one-day series too. I salute your endurance and your hunger.’ A few days later, in Gwalior, Sachin became the first Indian to score a double hundred in ODIs. It was a great way to wind down our international season.

After the third edition of the IPL, we made the short hop to Sri Lanka where, for one reason or the other, success had proved elusive. We would beat the same Sri Lankan side comfortably in India, but when we went there, despite our familiarity with the conditions, we invariably came second best. We were determined to correct that anomaly, but familiar trouble lay in store in the first Test.

Before the start of the three-match series, Muttiah Muralitharan announced  that he would retire at the end of the Galle Test. Sri Lankan cricket’s greatest match-winner was ending his run, and all the attention was justifiably centred on him. He needed eight victims to become the first bowler to reach a whopping 800 Test wickets, and seemed on course for that milestone when he spun a mean web in the first innings with 5 for 63, forcing us to follow-on the fourth day.  We were in a pickle at 197 for 7, still nearly 50 away from avoiding an  innings defeat with the entire final day left, when I struck up a good partnership with Abhimanyu Mithun, in his first Test series. For an hour, Mithun kept Sri Lanka at bay until Lasith Malinga had his number. Then, Ishant helped me extend our miniscule advantage. We were a long way from safety, but if we could hang in there, who knew? We batted through to lunch and a little beyond, and with each passing minute, Murali was getting more and more agitated. He was perched on 799 Test wickets, and he was as dismayed as I was—but for entirely different reasons—when I was run out for 69. After I cooled down in the dressing room, I found myself joining my teammates in silently rooting for Murali. Ishant and Pragyan Ojha were in defiant mode, and we wanted them to carry on for as long as possible. The only concession we made was that if one of them did get out, it should be to Murali, the champion off-spinner. It would have been a travesty of justice had he been left stranded on 799. As it turned out, Murali induced an edge from Ojha, which was expertly held at slip by Mahela Jayawardene. I have great respect for Murali, a close friend and an excellent ambassador both for his country and the game, and I was thrilled that he was going out on a high, even though the bitter taste of impending defeat lingered.

The loss, and especially the manner of my second-innings dismissal, rankled during the winding four-hour drive from Galle to Colombo. We hadn’t played like the best Test side in the world. We had every intention of correcting our poor record in Sri Lanka, but we were not playing well enough to achieve that objective. And my back spasms were beginning to flare up. I was anything but upbeat.

The early exchanges during the second Test in Colombo did little to lift my mood. Sri Lanka won the toss on a shirtfront at the SSC ground and piled on the runs. We weren’t quite the walking wounded, but Yuvi was struggling with his knee, Gautam had a groin problem, and Viru and I were battling back issues. However, Viru showed no effects of injury as he blazed to 99 after Sri Lanka had declared at 642 for 4. Sachin produced an excellent double century and Suresh Raina celebrated his debut with a beautiful hundred, grabbing his chance with both hands. We came away from the Test with the better of the exchanges, but Sri Lanka still led 1–0 with one match to go.

During the course of the series, Malinga had spoken to Gauti about Dr Eliyantha White, a spiritual healer who many called the ‘Miracle Doctor’. Sachin had flown out before the final of the IPL that year to meet Dr White, and made a miraculous recovery from an injury, in time for the Mumbai Indians’ title clash against Chennai Super Kings. Nitin had specifically asked us not to seek treatment from Dr White, but given his reputation and the possibility of a painfree existence, Viru, Gauti, Yuvi and I went to see him the evening the SSC Test ended. Dr White gave me a liquid concoction, and asked me to meet him the following day, which was three days before the final Test. Even though I couldn’t sleep a wink that night because of the medicine, I decided to visit him again the next day and he repeated the second dose of three, leading to another sleepless night. The final dose the next day produced a third straight night of no sleep, accompanied by a massively elevated heart rate and profuse, relentless sweating. When I came down for breakfast the morning before the match, I was severely disoriented; during practice, I didn’t have the energy to even put my pads on. I looked around me, and found Viru, Gauti and Yuvi in a similarly dishevelled, spent state.

We laughed weakly at our predicament, but those smiles disappeared when Sachin strode up and gave us a piece of his mind. He knew we had no business visiting the doctor—apparently, sleeplessness, palpitations, sweating, disorientation and drowsiness were expected side-effects for the first 72 hours— and had a go at us for disregarding the physio’s instructions. Suitably chastened, I tried to bat at the nets. As always, MS sent down a flurry of bouncers, and I pulled instinctively. My reactions were slow and I could easily have been struck on the face. ‘What a mess we have made of this situation,’ I told Viru. ‘I don’t know how I will get through the Test.’

I did have a great evening leading up to the Test, fortified by an excellent home-made meal. Several days ago, I had accepted an invitation from Rajen Udeshi, a Sri Lankan cricket official, who is a passionate cricket lover and follower of Indian cricket, to dine with him and his family in Colombo. He is a dear friend to many Indian cricketers and a gracious, willing host with a ready smile. Even though I wasn’t at my best, I didn’t want to break my word and I ended up having a wonderful time. His wife Sonal was a brilliant cook and the kids smart, so the evening went by quickly and I temporarily forgot my discomfort.

MS lost the toss the following day at the P Sara Oval and Sri Lanka chose to bat. By mid-morning, I was back to normal, but by stumps, the back spasms returned with a vengeance. I remember hearing a ‘click’ as I tweaked my back while fielding at mid-wicket, but I made a half-century as we took a slender lead in the first innings. There was plenty of time left in the game on a quick-scoring ground to force a result, and we had Sri Lanka on the ropes at 125 for 8 in their second knock before Ajantha Mendis, my old nemesis, and Thilan Samaraweera rallied them to 267.

That left us needing 257 to square the series, challenging but achievable given that it was still a good batting surface and time was not a factor. But Suraj Randiv, the off-spinner, worked our top order over and by stumps on day four, we were on the back foot at 53 for 3, with Murali Vijay, Viru and Rahul dismissed.

I was forced to walk in some 20 minutes after play began on the final  morning when Ishant became Randiv’s fourth victim. At 62 for 4, we required a  further 195, and even though Suresh and MS were still to come, our hopes hinged on a substantial partnership between Sachin and me. By then, my back had become rock-hard, the soft muscles around the bulging disc hardening to form a natural protective covering. I could barely move, and told Sachin  that I needed a runner. He was, however, insistent that I should bat without a runner. ‘We don’t want any scope for miscommunication, Lachi,’ he said. ‘Forget about the runner, just bear the pain and continue batting.’

I could hardly disagree with him, and somehow gritted my teeth and went through to lunch, every movement sending a stabbing pain through my body. At lunch, I told Viru that I couldn’t see myself continuing without a runner. I also told him that Sachin felt that a third pair of legs would impact our rhythm. Viru laughed and skipped away, but when we walked back to resume our chase, he accompanied us as my runner. He had managed to convince Sachin that I was in no position to run, but I am sure Sachin wasn’t amused at being dismissed almost immediately afterwards. He had had unpleasant experiences with runners in the past, and his worst fears came true again.

While Sachin and I had added 109, we were still 87 short of the target. Suresh, fresh off the hundred on debut and 62 in the first innings, played his shots freely. In a bid to unsettle me, Malinga decided to test me with a slew of bumpers. My back didn’t allow me to duck or sway out of the way, so I stood  and pulled him through mid-wicket repeatedly. Boundaries flowed from both ends and the Sri Lankans looked stunned. They were clearly missing Murali, who had performed the twin roles of run-denier and wicket-taker for so long, and were ill-equipped to slip into the defensive once we got on top. Those 87 runs came off a mere 102 deliveries when we were under pressure. It was a brilliant finish to the Test and the series. I came back unconquered on 103, my first hundred in Sri Lanka, but most crucially, a century in a winning cause.  While the limited-overs specialists stayed back for the one-day series that followed, I returned to Hyderabad hoping to find a permanent solution to my back problems. Between the P Sara Test and our next Test engagement, against Australia in Mohali in October, I had two months at my disposal. However, I had to wait for Nitin to return from Sri Lanka before I could go to the NCA in Bengaluru. Nitin accompanied me for an MRI, after which he suggested that I travel to London to meet two spine specialists. I had to wait ten days for my visa, and by the time I landed in London, five weeks had passed since I last played cricket.

The two doctors in London offered contrasting opinions. One of them wanted me to take an injection, the other was against it. Nitin, who was with the Mumbai Indians in South Africa for the Champions League, left the decision to me, but I wasn’t qualified enough to make the call. In the end, I chose not to take the shot, returning home after 10 days of core strengthening and rehabilitation. I wasn’t in a good frame of mind when we reassembled in Mohali ahead of the first Test against Australia. My back was still troublesome, and I went into a spasm again on the first day of the match when the Aussies were batting. I was furious at the nonchalance with which the team management had approached my injury. I told Gary that I was disappointed there wasn’t a better injurymanagement system in place in a team that prided itself on professionalism and on being the best in the world, not just on the field but also off it. The doctors in London had asked me for my exercise chart, and I was surprised to hear them both agree that 80 per cent of the exercises recommended by the team’s trainer were detrimental to my back. They also told me that I had aggravated the injury by batting in the second innings at the P Sara Oval. The rotation for the back because of the pulls against Malinga had contributed to the worsening of the injury. I was dangerously close to blowing my top as Gary heard me out patiently.

Having let off steam, I settled for batting at No. 10 in a Test match—for the only time—in the first innings. Our top order had done enough to get us to within 23 of Australia’s 428, and when our bowling group packed them off for 192, we were on track for a comfortable win. We needed only 216, and even though I was all but unavailable, a line-up of Gauti, Viru, Rahul, Sachin, Suresh and MS was more than capable of scaling that total down.

Ben Hilfenhaus didn’t believe that. He wrecked the top order on the fourth evening, and we collapsed to 48 for 4 with four overs left. Zak went in as the nightwatchman—I couldn’t bat higher than No. 7 because I had not fielded for the entire Australian second innings—when Gary asked if I would go in at the fall of the next wicket. Despite my obvious handicap, I readily agreed. ‘Anything for the team, Gary,’ I told him. Gary’s logic was that there was no point in my going to bat at No. 9 or No. 10. The team would be better served by my batting at No. 7 with a couple of good batsmen to follow, and I was more than happy to do that.

With the help of my teammates, I padded up and waited nervously, praying for Sachin and Zak to see the day through. They did, and as soon as stumps were drawn, I asked Gary to rustle up some net bowlers. Sreesanth also joined them, but I could barely move a muscle. The pain was unbearable, and I gave up the exercise after ten minutes, hoping a good night’s rest would do the trick. Not a chance. I didn’t sleep the entire night even though by then, the cot had been thrown out of the room and I lay flat on my back on the hard floor. More than once, it occurred to me that my going out to bat in this condition made no sense. The following morning, I rang my father. As always, he reminded me of the hardships our soldiers encounter on the borders—their pain and discomfort, the long months away from their families, the huge sacrifices for our safety. He urged me to overlook my body’s protestations and use the power of the mind to blank everything out. Even though conversations of this nature had become part of a programmed routine between father and son, everything he said went straight to my heart and I was all pumped up.

Zak didn’t last long on the final day. This time, Sachin had no objection to Suresh walking out with me as my runner. He knew how poorly I was, and he did his best to keep my spirits up. I knew that I was selling him short. We were five down with the target 140 away, and Sachin needed to focus on his own batting. Instead, he had to assume the extra responsibility of looking after me. Again, I was reminded of what a wonderful team player he was. We put together a little stand and brought the target down to under 100 when Doug Bollinger dismissed Sachin. Dragging himself off the ground, he looked imploringly at me. He said nothing. Nothing needed to be said. MS and Bhajji fell in the next 15 minutes, and we were 124 for 8, 92 shy. The writing was on the wall when the gangly Ishant arrived in the middle to a rowdy reception from the buoyant Aussies. He wasn’t fully fit either, having taken a painkilling injection for his knee. ‘Laxman bhai, kya karenge (what can we do)?’ he asked in his squeaky voice. I chuckled and replied, ‘Match tho gaya, lekin hum ladenge (the match is out of our hands, but we shall fight). Let them get us out, we will not give our wickets away. You play your game, I will play mine.’

That was good enough for Ishant. He kept his end of the bargain and I mine. Between overs, Suresh kept saying, ‘Come on Laxman bhai, come on Ishant, we can do this.’ Brick by tenuous brick, we rebuilt the chase. We didn’t think of 216, or how many more we needed to get there. We kept the good balls out, rotated strike and made gentle progress. As our stand crossed 30, worry lines began to crease Ricky Ponting’s forehead. Australia switched to all-out attack, and that’s precisely what we wanted. As the field moved in, I put a few balls away to the boundary, and so did Ishant. I could see the panic building within the Australian ranks as our alliance ticked past the 50-run mark. ‘Ab kya karenge, Laxman bhai (what shall we do now)?’ Ishant asked as we punched gloves. ‘Abhi tak jo kiya, wahi karenge (we will continue to do whatever we have done till now),’ I told him. It was important to not think about the result, to not try to do anything differently. As a tailender, with the target tantalisingly close, the temptation to go for a big stroke can be huge. I didn’t want Ishant to fall into that trap. To his credit, he continued to display the same solidity for 106 minutes until Hilfenhaus got him leg before, for a magnificent 31.

We had inexplicably, unexpectedly, put on 81, but when last man Ojha came out, a further 11 were needed. My first task was to do to Ojha what Sachin had done to me—put him at ease, make him feel comfortable and relaxed. I knew the pressure he was under. After my partnership with Ishant, he didn’t want to be the one who let the team down.

By then, Mitchell Johnson was back in the attack and bowling with extreme hostility. I wanted to take as much of the strike against Johnson as possible, so deep into every over at the other end, I was looking for a single. Off the fifth ball of Hilfenhaus’ over, with six required, I drove to the right of midoff and screamed for a single. Ojha heard me shout ‘one’, but when he looked up, I hadn’t moved an inch. He had forgotten that Suresh was running for me, and stood rooted to his crease. My back was hurting badly but I was determined to face Johnson, and seeing Ojha not responding to my call, I lost my cool on the field for the first time in my career. I let rip at poor Ojha as my emotions got the better of me, and an expletive or two escaped my lips. By the end of the over, I calmed down and apologised profusely to my partner, who had the onerous task of batting out a full over from Johnson.

‘Koi baat nahin (don’t worry),’ I told him. Ojha looked at me, perplexed and disbelieving. Six balls from Johnson beckoned. He was quivering. I thought the game was over off the second ball of that over when Johnson struck Ojha’s pads dead in front of the stumps. The Australians believed it was out too, and were so caught up appealing that they ignored the ball that had trickled to point. Miraculously, Billy Bowden turned the appeal down, and Ojha thought he could sneak a single. As Suresh screamed at him to get back into his crease, Steve Smith charged in and flung the ball at the stumps at the striker’s end. Had the ball hit, Ojha would have been a goner; instead, the miss proved costly as the ball sped over the turf for four. Two more now, just two more. Those winning runs came two deliveries later, leg-byes again, as the ball flew to fine leg off Ojha’s pads. Suresh had already completed two, while Ojha ran back to the danger end like the wind for the second run. From square-leg, I was willing him to make his ground. Like my teammates in the dressing room, like all the Indian fans at the ground and watching on television. When he slid his bat in, I forgot the pain and threw my hands up. Suresh charged in from the bowler’s end, and Ojha joined us in a hug of ecstasy. Soon, the rest of the team tumbled on to the ground, making a beeline for the three heroes.

By now, I had worked out a formula for batting under pressure. It involved acceptance and understanding, to start with. There was no point in being overpositive. Once I understood what the problem was, I could come up with a
solution. It was important not to panic.

My solution was to break the end goal into smaller targets. When we achieved little milestones, the bigger objective automatically took care of itself. For this, I had to be in sync with my partner, so the communication had to be straightforward and clear.

I also had to accept that while there was pressure, I would follow my routine. If you lose patience, you are bound to make mistakes. If you remain patient for long periods, the opposition will try something different. That’s when you must cash in, but without ever becoming complacent because there is still a job to be done. This is not a formula that comes with an always-win guarantee, but it worked for me more often than not.

While we savoured the get-out-of-jail one-wicket win, there was another Test to be played in four days’ time, in Bengaluru. I flew home to meet Sanjog Mathur, a senior at school and now a spine surgeon in the US, who was back in Hyderabad on a holiday. Sanjog administered a cortisone injection and when I reached Bengaluru, I didn’t feel any pain. I didn’t feel anything. My back had gone numb, there was no sensation at all.

I had a trouble-free stint at the nets the evening before the game—a fitness test—but I was on the horns of a dilemma. I wasn’t confident that my back would survive the rigours of five days. It hadn’t during my two previous Tests, but I had been able to get runners because I had hurt my back during play. Here, if I carried an injury into the Test, I wouldn’t get a runner while batting, and the team wouldn’t get a substitute fielder either. To play Australia with 11 men was no easy task. To take them on with 10 was little short of self-destructive. Whenever I grappled with an issue of this nature, I turned to Sachin or Anil for advice. Anil was no longer around, of course, so I told Sachin I wasn’t sure what to do. ‘Don’t play,’ he said, drawing from his experience of having received such injections previously. ‘It may work for the duration of the game, or it may not.’ I ruled myself out of the game, Cheteshwar Pujara made his Test debut, and made an instant impact with a sparkling 72 in the second innings on being promoted to No. 3. We won by seven wickets, the series was secured 2–0, and we had now won three Tests on the trot.

Before this series against Australia, I had told my family that I would love to retire in early 2012, after beating Australia in Australia. No Indian team had won a Test series Down Under, and I firmly believed that we had the resources to correct that record. The path was clear—win the Test series in Australia, retire, appear for the entrance exam, go on to become a doctor. But now, I wasn’t so sure. The back had become a major issue, and each day, I feared the worst. Was this the end of the road? Was this how I was fated to part ways with the love of my life?

It wasn’t, evidently, though the next attempt to fix the back wasn’t without some attendant drama.

Nitin recommended a visit to Munich to seek out Dr Hans-Wilhelm Muller-Wohlfahrt, the club doctor at Bayern Munich FC who had successfully treated a host of celebrated footballers, cricketers, golfers and rugby players. He was also the German national football team doctor, hence it was impossible to get an immediate appointment. The BCCI tried their best, but the earliest appointment they managed was in January 2011. Between October and January, we had a home series against New Zealand and a tour of South Africa, so the January appointment wasn’t a great development.

Sachin was having issues with his knee at the time, and had managed to snag an immediate appointment with Dr Muller-Wohlfahrt through his contacts in Adidas, who were also sponsors of Bayern Munich. When he learnt from Nitin about my situation, he rang me from Mumbai and asked me to go to Munich in his place. ‘I think it’s important you go. I know how bad your back is,’ he insisted. ‘My knee injury won’t prevent me from playing, but if you don’t get your back sorted, we know what will happen.’

I was staggered. He had worked his contacts and managed to find a slot for  himself, but he was selflessly willing to give it away for my sake. I wouldn’t have any of it, and flatly refused. ‘Your appointment, you must go, Sach,’ I said. He then tried to get Anjali to convince me, but I made it clear that I wouldn’t take his place. Exasperated, Sachin said, ‘Enough of this. You come with me, let’s see what happens. Let’s at least make the effort.’

Grateful for his magnanimity, I joined him in Munich, only to run into a stern receptionist who was incensed that I had dared to land up unannounced. For the first two days, I accompanied Sachin to Dr Muller-Wohlfahrt’s clinic, and came back without meeting the doctor. Gradually, Sachin convinced him that I needed his services very badly. Slowly, the doctor’s defences melted, and he finally saw me on the third day.

An MRI revealed extensive damage to my disc and facet joints, and the good doctor was surprised that a deformity at birth had not expressed itself for so many years.

My spinal canal was very narrow, he explained, which was the genesis of my travails. It was an irreversible process, he added, before proclaiming gravely, ‘If my treatment doesn’t work, you must stop playing. Immediately.’ It was a rude jolt. I tried to explain to him what cricket meant to me. After hearing me out patiently, he told me, ‘If the treatment doesn’t work and you continue playing, there is a good chance that you will be paralysed for  life. I understand that you are deeply committed to the sport, but it is important at this stage to look beyond it. There is a whole life outside of cricket, and unless you are healthy, you will not get to experience that life.’

I broke down, visions of life in a wheelchair racing through my mind. Fortunately, Sachin was around with the right words and a comforting arm around my shoulder. By the time we decided to start treatment, I had regained my equilibrium. Dr Muller-Wohlfahrt would do his best, and I would play it by the ear, not thinking about whether the treatment would work.

The procedure involved 10 injections a day on my back for six days in a row. It was as painful as the spasms while batting, but I didn’t mind it one bit because its objective was to help me extend my career. Through Dr Muller-  Wohlfahrt’s diligence, the Almighty’s blessings and the prayers of my wellwishers, the treatment worked and the pain became a lot more manageable. I was now in a position to chase my dream of a series win in Australia. That was still some distance away, and of course, I could have quit any time. I never played the game for milestones, averages and numbers. I didn’t have any individual targets in mind, but I was fixated on being a part of the team that won a Test series in Australia. Before the Australia tour of late 2011, we had an away series in England in the summer. There would be no better way to go out than being a part of victorious teams in both those countries.

First up, though, were New Zealand—always feisty, always competitive, always punching above their weight. Dr Muller-Wohlfahrt’s grim warning meant that, despite the relative success of the treatment, I was living on borrowed time as a professional sportsperson, and I wanted to make the most of it. The team’s success and my contributions to its victories remained the paramount objective, but I was also on the lookout for more hundreds.

I was surprised at how well I hit the ball when I joined the team in Ahmedabad for the first Test against the Kiwis. On a track that offered the bowlers no joy, the game seemed headed for a dull stalemate after both sides topped 400 in their respective first innings when Chris Martin blew it wide open. Swinging the new cherry with devastating effect, he left us gasping at 15 for 5, only 43 ahead. My formula for batting under pressure would be tested again. MS and I had a bit of a partnership, but the real star was Bhajji. As far back as in 2002, I remember telling him in England that if he paid more attention to his batting, he could produce big scores with regularity. Bhajji packed a punch, was blessed with timing and a good defence, and he brought out all those traits now, first to defend, and then play with freedom. When he walked out, I told him, ‘Hang in for now but don’t be defensive, play your natural game.’ For the first few overs, neither of us played many strokes but as we dug in and the ball got older, batting became a lot easier. Bhajji began to express himself and I cruised into the ’90s when I got a terrible decision from Steve Davis. I played so far away from my body to a delivery well outside off that the only way the ball from Daniel Vettori could have struck my pad was off the inside edge. Steve failed to spot the massive deflection and packed me off for 91. It took all my self-control to maintain my calm till I entered the dressing room, where I could vent my anger and frustration. It was a horrendous decision, compounded by Zak being adjudged leg before to another inside edge off the very next ball. However, with Bhajji bringing up a well deserved maiden ton, we got away with a comfortable draw.

Personally, I was pleased to have survived physically unscathed. My back had held up well, and I hadn’t left the field even once for attention. However, I had a new routine to follow. Every morning, I went to the physio for 30 minutes of prehab and rehab to release the back, which became a constant for the rest of my career. When we went to the ground, I had a set of warm-up drills separate from the rest of the team, and the physio worked on my back for 10 minutes at each interval, and at the close of play.

The second match was in Hyderabad, a special event for me because I had never played a Test in the city of my birth. To play for the country in my hometown with my family, coaches and friends watching was a dream come true, and I wanted to celebrate the occasion with a hundred as my obsession with three figures continued to mount. I had reached 74 when, off the first ball after tea on day three, I missed a flick against Martin and was plumb in front. Bhajji made a second hundred in a row—he had started thinking like a batsman—and celebrated without inhibition and we entertained hopes of victory after taking a 122-run lead.

That was when Brendon McCullum took charge. Brendon had given up the wicketkeeping gloves to concentrate on his batting in his new role as opener, and made the most of the flat deck—some of my mates called it a road—to pulverise our bowling. He blasted his way to 225 to deflate my belated homecoming somewhat, meaning that the series was 0–0 going into Nagpur, where Rahul made a spectacular 191 to set up our innings win. We would have loved a more convincing scoreline than 1–0 ahead of our visit to South Africa, but we had form and confidence on our side as we eyed a maiden series triumph there. The Tests against New Zealand were followed by a five-match ODI series, but the BCCI rested a host of limited-overs regulars so that we could travel to South Africa to practise at Gary’s academy in Cape Town. In the past, we had taken time to hit our straps, so the idea was to get used to the conditions  in South Africa by the time of the first Test in Centurion. In the gap between the Nagpur Test and our departure to South Africa, I went to the NCA for continued strengthening of my back. To my dismay, the spasms returned again, and I had to put off my travel to Cape Town while the rest of the boys went ahead. I had been working hard on countering the craft of Dale Steyn, so I probably batted a little more than I should have, which led to the spasms. After plenty of attention from Ashish Kaushik, the new physio at the NCA, I flew out to South Africa four days behind schedule and linked up with the guys in Cape Town, where I batted indoors a lot with Gary and Paul Close, the national team physio, keeping a close watch.

Centurion was a complete disaster. We lost Zak to injury the day before the match and had to bat in unimaginably challenging conditions. We were skittled for 136. Jacques Kallis replied with a classy 201 not out, his first Test double hundred, to stretch South Africa’s lead to 474, and a massive defeat loomed. I was bowled for 7 in the first innings by a beautiful out swinger from Steyn, and in the second innings was caught for 8 playing an extravagant drive that I edged to gully. But Sachin and MS battled hard to delay the inevitable. Batting with supreme authority, Sachin made an astonishing 50th Test century. He was 37 years old and had been playing for the country for 21 years, and yet the desire remained undiminished. It was both exhilarating and humbling. After all these years, and despite the presence of other quality batsmen, we continued to depend heavily on his heroics. I didn’t think it was fair that he alone should carry the burden even at this late stage of his career.

The team was scheduled to spend a couple of days in Sun City, but wary of potential damage to the back from the travel, I opted to stay back in Johannesburg. Taking a cue from me, Sachin, Viru, Zak, Bhajji and a couple of others too skipped Sun City. Our friend in Johannesburg, Kiran, organised nets for us and we had a fruitful couple of days. I remember whining to Zak, ‘Why should Sachin alone have to get runs all the time? Why can’t I contribute more to the team?’

When we arrived at Kingsmead for the second Test in Durban, with Zak now available for selection, the pitch evoked mixed emotions. While we had our most potent bowling attack to choose from, the conditions were entirely against the batsmen. We recognised that this was our best opportunity to square the series, provided the batsmen knuckled down and ground it out. South Africa were a strong outfit, but the Centurion blowout wasn’t a true reflection of our abilities.

Graeme Smith stuck us in and Steyn was virtually unplayable on an overcast morning, with the ball darting around off the pitch. My determination to make a meaningful score manifested itself in a positive approach, and the ball flew off my bat as I raced into the 30s in quick time, inclusive of a pulled six off Steyn. I remember that stroke like it was yesterday. After all, I only have five sixes in Test cricket.

I was just beginning to feel comfortable when I pulled Steyn again, from outside off, wide of mid-on. Lonwabo Tsotsobe, the big fast bowler, bounded to his right and put in a dive to snaffle the ball inches from the turf. I was stunned, I couldn’t believe my luck. Once again, a freak dismissal had packed me off when I was comfortably set on a demanding track with a bit of grip and lateral movement, as well as help for the spinners.

We scrambled to 205, probably par for the course, but a refreshed Zak and Bhajji turned it on to open up a 74-run lead. Zak bowled with the fire befitting his status as the leader of the pack and showed how much we had missed him in Centurion, but he wasn’t done yet. With Morkel in the lead role, South Africa worked through our batting, and we were 148 for 7 when Zak strode out, all purpose. Our lead was a handy 222 but definitely not decisive. Zak kept me company during a stand of 70, while I played positively. Given the conditions and the batting at our disposal, I realised there was no point pottering around. Zak and Ishant fell in quick succession and I was in the 90s at the fall of the ninth wicket. I had faith in Sreesanth, but I also wanted a hundred. When I spotted a short, wide ball from Steyn, my eyes lit up and I went for a fullblooded cut. All I managed was a nick that nestled safely in Mark Boucher’s gloves. Another hundred missed, but I would have taken that 96 any day. It came on a demanding track against a top-class attack, and no other batsman from either side had touched even 40. More importantly, it boosted our lead to 302. Zak and Sreesanth were brilliant in the second innings, the latter producing a snorter to account for Kallis and make possible one of the memorable photographs of the tour—the batsman airborne, his head arched back, the bat thrust in front of his face in self-defence.

The 87-run win helped us square the series, with the decider to follow in Cape Town. For the fourth time in five months and seven Tests, I had delivered when we had our backs to the wall. For the third time, I had played a key part in our victory. The man of the match award was particularly fulfilling. As I cradled the trophy in my hands, Zak whispered, ‘Happy now?’ My back survived the thumps from my friends, and Gary couldn’t stop smiling. He had labelled me Mr Comeback Man. He was a big fan of Michael Bevan, the Australian batsman who could pull off ODI victories from out of nowhere, a miracle worker if there was one. As we savoured our success at Kingsmead, Gary told me, ‘You are the Michael Bevan of Test cricket.’

Cape Town, and an almost subcontinental surface, gave us an outstanding chance to secure the series, but we were thwarted by the genius of Kallis. Sachin’s battle with Steyn in our first innings was an electric passage of play— champion batsman against ferocious paceman, immovable object against irresistible force. Steyn bowled his heart out and had everyone’s measure, but Sachin didn’t budge. He kept the good ones out, latched on to the rare bad ones and conjured up an awesome 146. It was his 51st Test ton. It would also be his last.

We had South Africa on the mat at 130 for 6 in the second innings, their lead just 132, and probably got a little ahead of ourselves. I was just coming to terms with another freak dismissal—run out at the bowler’s end, backing up, as a Sachin pull off Paul Harris was deflected by the bowler on to the stumps—when Kallis put on a masterclass. He was batting with a broken rib, and grimaced in pain every time Bhajji made him stretch, but his resolve was unshakeable. The ball was turning square, and Kallis understood that he had to do something to put Bhajji off his rhythm. Out came the reverse sweep, immediately backed up by the conventional one, and by the time we wisened up, the horse had bolted. Kallis made his second century of the game and the third of the series, and Boucher rediscovered his touch as the seventh-wicket pair put on 103. Gradually, they transferred the pressure on to us, forcing us to negotiate a tricky final day to escape with a draw. Gautam made a gritty 64 despite being struck on the elbow early in his innings by Morkel, and I was 32 not out when the match was called off.

It was an opportunity lost for us to create history in South Africa, and I was not too happy at having finished the series without a hundred despite batting well. But we took pride in having bounced back from the Centurion thrashing. The night the Cape Town Test ended, we headed to Gary’s home for dinner, one happy family that had grown in size with the arrival of the one-day reinforcements. Sachin, Zak, Viru, Yuvi, Nehra and I stayed back long after the others had left. At 2 a.m., we were pleading with Gary’s wife Deborah to allow him to stay on as our coach for one more year. Gary had told us that he would be leaving after the World Cup in three months’ time, but we had a tough year of Test cricket ahead with tours to England and Australia. He had created a good team environment, each of us was comfortable in our roles, and we wanted continuity.

Deborah heard us out patiently, but as she outlined the pressures of raising a young family on her own, I knew that I had played my last Test with Gary as coach. It had been a great ride, made possible by a wonderful human being who is now a good friend. Life had to go on.