In every cricketer’s career is an opposition or a venue that brings the best out of them; you relish playing that opponent, you enjoy batting at that ground. In my case, the opponent was Australia, and the venue was Eden Gardens. When Australia and Eden came together in March 2001, it was a double whammy. Though it is the 281 that is remembered most fondly and widely, I have always loved the experience of batting at the iconic ground in Kolkata, egged on by the energy and vibrancy of the most die-hard and passionate supporters I have come across anywhere in the world.

Kolkata is very dear to me. Here, an aura of sheer happiness seems to surround most people. While most of us constantly look over our shoulders or are so caught up in the race to be the best that we often don’t take notice of the smaller things, the simple pleasure that the average Kolkatan derives from the most ordinary activities is something that I never stop marvelling at. I travelled there a fair bit when I was an active cricketer, but post retirement, my visits to Kolkata have become even more frequent, be it as a television commentator or as a batting consultant to the Cricket Association of Bengal.

Even before that 281, I had fallen in love with Kolkata, and with Eden. I looked forward to being enveloped in a simultaneously uncomfortable yet vaguely comforting cocoon of heat and humidity when I stepped out of the airport terminal. When I travelled with the Indian team, I was astonished by the sea of people gathered at the airport to merely catch a glimpse of their favourite stars. This was perhaps the case at most Indian airports during that time, but Kolkata was somehow first among equals, a special city that had a unique place in our hearts.

My first tryst with Eden, in the summer of 1994, was a memorable experience, even though I didn’t actually get to play a single ball. The India Under-19 team was competing for the P Sen Trophy. Bright-eyed at the opportunity to play at a venue that had hosted several memorable matches, I arrived at the ground, my excitement at fever pitch. My jaw dropped as I stepped on to the park—I had never been in a ground as big as this. The stands, deserted as they were, overhung the playing area, intimidating and invigorating at the same time. I could almost hear the chants and screams of the non-existent fans. It was an experience of a lifetime, and the goosebumps resurface every time I think about it.

Live television had transported me to iconic venues across the world, but  none fascinated me more than Eden. I had watched the final of the 1987 World Cup spellbound, disappointed that India had fallen at the penultimate hurdle, but delighted that Allan Border’s Australia beat England in the title clash. I had seen Mohammad Azharuddin, his captaincy on the line, play an astonishing knock against England in January 1993, in the first Test of a three-match series. Prior to that match, Azzu bhai had practised rigorously at the Gymkhana Grounds in Secunderabad, and I had considered it my privilege to bowl to him in the nets. He was probably the first childhood hero I saw in the flesh. To watch him rip England to shreds, his 182 a magnificent compilation of the most exquisite shots, was nearly a personal success for me.

Later that year, Sachin bowled that remarkable final over against South Africa in the semi-final of the Hero Cup. South Africa required just 6 runs for victory at 190 for 8 when Sachin almost snatched the ball from Azzu bhai’s hand, even though any of the fast bowlers—Kapil Dev, Manoj Prabhakar, Javagal Srinath or Salil Ankola—could have bowled. He conceded only three runs and facilitated the team’s entry to the final, where, with Anil Kumble taking 6 for 12, India crushed West Indies by 102 runs.

All these memories came flooding back as I stood transfixed on the hallowed Eden outfield, that summer of ’94, not even daring to think of what it would be like if I walked out to the middle in a Test match, with the crowds going ‘VVS, VVS’. My heart was thudding so rapidly and loudly that I feared the worst. I had fallen half in love with Eden merely watching matches on television. Now, I was well and truly gone, and I hadn’t even picked up the bat yet!

There was to be no game, though. Wet weather ruined my ambitions of an Eden debut as a teenager, but I knew I would be back. Rather, I hoped I would. To stride out to the middle, to ask for my guard, to survey the field, to lap up the electricity and, hopefully, to have ‘VVS, VVS’ ringing in my ears. I had a dream. . .

I returned to Eden that same year. I had just turned 20 and was playing for South Zone in the Duleep Trophy against Central Zone. It was November 1994, and Test cricket wasn’t on the immediate horizon for me. But the Duleep Trophy call-up was an indicator that I was progressing along the right path. How quickly I could thrust myself to the forefront depended almost entirely on my performances.

The previous game, against East Zone in Jamshedpur, hadn’t been an overwhelming success for me. I had only made 23 and 14 not out, so the Eden game was a huge one. However, on my Eden debut, batting for a star-studded South Zone at an unfamiliar No. 5, I made just one before being dismissed by left-arm spinner Manish Dosi. I was gutted. What had happened to my dream? What I did get to see was a dream innings from WV Raman, the South Zone skipper who came in after me, at No. 6. WV and I crossed each other, he on the way to the middle, I to lick my wounds in the pavilion. For the next five hours, he put on a veritable exhibition, fusing left-handed elegance with a typically laidback, almost lazy grace, putting the Central Zone bowling in its place. My disappointment and dejection disappeared. That innings brought my focus back, it made me more determined to pursue my passion and not let failures bog me down.

I have a rather strange record at Eden. I didn’t make even a single firstclass half-century in three matches and five innings, but my Test numbers there are second to none—1,217 runs in 10 Tests, an average of 110.63, one double hundred, four hundreds and three half-centuries in 15 innings. Safe to say that Eden is one of my favourite venues!

I have been asked many times to explain why Eden brought the best out of me. The answer has always been: ‘I don’t know’. I really don’t. I have thought about it, and thought about it some more, in the years since I hung up my boots, but there is no single, tangible reason that I can think of. Quite obviously, the more I played at Eden, the more comfortable and at home I felt there. But Eden isn’t the only ground that evoked the ‘comfort zone’ feeling in me. I felt totally at ease at M Chinnaswamy Stadium in Bangalore, for instance, as well as at the PCA Stadium in Mohali. Outside India, as I walked into the Sydney Cricket Ground (SCG) or the Gabba in Brisbane, I felt like I truly belonged. And I did court success in these grounds, but Eden remains unparalleled.

Nearly three years before that 281 came my first substantial knock in the City of Joy, also against the Aussies. Within five months of my national debut, I had been kicked up the order to open the batting, in the Caribbean in March 1997. I was too young, too raw and too eager to question the move; I was just happy to be playing Test cricket for India, and I was grateful to be considered good enough to be in the playing eleven, even if it meant having to open the innings, something I had not done in any grade of cricket until then. Two half-centuries in four Tests in the Caribbean seemed to suggest that the move to promote me was a masterstroke, and I followed that with 95 against Australia, at Eden, in March 1998. Navjot Singh Sidhu was my opening partner, and we added 191 at a remarkable clip. He was the established star, I was the young kid trying to work his way up the ladder. For nearly four hours, I negotiated Michael Kasprowicz and Shane Warne and Gavin Robertson, the offspinner, but with a maiden century for the taking, I was caught behind off Robertson, a bitter blow given how desperate I had been to get to a three-figure score.

Thereafter, when in Eden, I had this feeling of returning to my cricketing home every time I hauled my gear to the changing room, or hit the nets to the right of the pavilion, inside the playing arena. There was a feeling of comfort, the body loose, the mind relaxed, the heart joyous. Cricket is of course a game of bat and ball, with skills paramount, but it is also a game that is played between the ears. The more relaxed and focused you are, the better are your chances of succeeding.

There is a very thin line between being focused and being obsessed. The former entails attention to detail during preparation, reading the pitch and the opposition bowling, being ready for any eventuality, and feeling confident that you have done everything within your means to give yourself the best shot at scoring runs. The latter is all-consuming and takes your mind away from the larger picture, from the process, as it were. If all you are thinking about is the outcome, the processes get skewed. That’s a lesson I learnt very early—in life, even earlier than in cricket—and it was a lesson that was to serve me well as my career gathered steam.

At Eden in those days, the pitch was brilliant to bat on for the first four days of a Test, at the very least. There was good carry, which was great for a batsman like me who loved the ball coming on to the bat. I wasn’t so much a power batsman as a touch player, relying on timing and placement rather than bludgeoning the cricket ball. The faster the ball came on to the bat, the more comfortable I felt, because it meant I didn’t need to generate pace on my own. The bounce in Eden was true and you could trust it. As I had grown up on matting pitches in Hyderabad, I was fairly competent at rocking back and pulling the cricket ball, and the bounce at Eden allowed me to pull without fear. The outfield was lightning quick, so the moment you got the ball past the infield, there was value for your shots. And then, there was the crowd.

Indian crowds tend to be the noisiest, the most boisterous, the most passionate, and I say this with due respect to the cricket-mad fans in Bangladesh and the papare-driven spectators in Sri Lanka. Not for us the polite applause and the let’s-get-back-to-our-beers. We love to express ourselves, aloud and without inhibition, and we let the whole world know what we are made of and who we are supporting.

Opposition teams have spoken repeatedly of silencing the Indian crowds, thereby seeking to take the unofficial but hugely influential 12th man out of the equation. I can see where they are coming from. The energy and the intensity that emanates from the crowd generally has a two-fold effect. When you are a little down, especially on the field during the course of a frustrating partnership, the crowd can dramatically lift you with its incessant chants and messages of encouragement that are never too far away. And when you are on top, the same fans bury the opposition in a cacophony of bugles and whistles and screams and roars. There is a symmetry to their expressions of joy and approbation that is truly staggering. About 75–80,000 people, most of them strangers to each other, work together in such great harmony that it seems like a well-rehearsed act. But that outpouring of delight is nothing if not spontaneous. The Mexican Wave, the banners and signboards, the screaming and shouting, the painted faces, the snazzy headwear—if there are grounds with more colourful fans than in India, well, I’ve never been to them.

It is quite easy, however, to get carried away by all the hype and adulation. When you walk out to incessant, unmissable chants of your name bursting forth from every corner of the packed ground, you can’t but feel a million feet tall. The adrenaline surge you feel as you brace for battle amplifies when the crowd goes bananas. It becomes imperative then, to find that happy space within your head where you derive inspiration from the encouragement of the fans, but don’t start to believe that you are invincible. It is not an easy balance to strike, believe me. And that is where Sachin stood head and shoulders above the rest. From his first Test to his 200th, he was greeted with euphoria, treated like royalty, made to feel as special as he obviously was. And yet, he never allowed that to get to him. Among the many things I admired and envied about him was his singlemindedness of purpose, his unwavering concentration, his ability to shut out everything but the immediate task at hand. It’s no accident that he stacked up the numbers he did.

It took me a while to get used to the adulation. Early in my career, I was guilty more than once of playing to the gallery—not showmanship as such, but trying to please the crowd, trying to give them what I thought they had come to see. That worked to my disadvantage but, more importantly, to the detriment of the team. It took me some time to understand that while it was laudable to want to entertain the crowd, my primary responsibility was to my team. That while a pretty 30 might excite the fans and trigger a wave of instant euphoria, it was of little use to my country when the need of the hour was a sedate 70, or mere occupation of the crease without worrying about the scoreboard.

I never tried to shut the crowd out; it is impossible to, when thousands are constantly in your ear, even if from 100 metres away. In trying to insulate yourself from the crowd, you expend energy that could be used gainfully elsewhere. And, in any case, the Indian crowd was my ally, my friend, my driving force, so why would I want to shut it out? The trick lay in feeding off their energy rather than trying to feed their energy by doing something rash and uncharacteristic. Different players react differently in such situations. Some thrive when there is a rush of emotion, others develop cold feet and freeze. I gradually came to terms with the Eden electricity. Through experience and a temperament that allowed me to treat success and failure with equanimity, I figured out what worked for me and what didn’t.

The spin-off of that 281 was that every time I played at Eden after that, especially in a Test match, I was expected to score runs. I too had that expectation, though it wasn’t always fulfilled. But to have the Eden crowd firmly behind me, in my corner, rooting for me and willing me to do well, is something I will cherish for ever and ever. ‘Lokhon da, tumi raaan korbe (Laxman da, you will score runs),’ used to be a constant from the time I got off the plane in Kolkata. Unaccustomed to the fanfare and to being in the limelight, I took my time getting used to it. I realised just how much they wanted me to do well— from our bus driver to the room-service waiter, from the hotel receptionists to the ever-smiling masseur in the dressing room. I felt elated, fortunate and blessed. When so many people are genuinely hoping and wishing and praying for your success, how can you not walk the extra mile to keep those smiles on their faces? How can you let them down for want of effort and commitment? These people taught me another invaluable life-lesson—enjoy your friends’ happiness, your teammates’ success, as if it’s your own.

And so, every time I alighted from the bus outside the Cricket Association of Bengal premises and found hordes of people clapping and cheering and craning their necks to catch just a momentary glimpse of us lost in our own world of sunglasses and earphones, I offered a silent prayer to the Almighty for having put us in this extraordinary position of enjoying the goodwill of so many. I offered an equally silent thanks to all those people, each of them a hero in their own right, each one sacrificing so much to back and support us. I felt that, as a team, we owed them success. Happiness. Smiles. Joy. And it was a feeling that was shared in the dressing room. We might sometimes have come across as unapproachable and unyielding, but we were never unappreciative or ungrateful. The Eden dressing room was a little sanctuary in my spiritual cricketing home. Every time I stepped inside it, I thought of the stalwarts who once occupied it, of their stirring deeds that the audiences had lapped up with unalloyed glee. I felt a surge of pride when I reflected on the exploits of our illustrious predecessors, and I felt privileged to step into the same rarefied space that the cricketing legends of an era gone by had occupied. Hyderabadi greats like Mohammad Azharuddin and, before him, ML Jaisimha, had played fantastic knocks at Eden. Jaisimha sir batted on all five days of the 1960 Test against Australia, and made 129 against England in the 1964 game, his highest Test score. Azzu bhai began his Test career at the same ground with a hundred on his debut, against England in 1984, and scored five centuries in his seven Tests there. I could scarcely believe that I was occupying the same space they had in the past.

Before the dressing room was pulled down and redesigned ahead of the 2011 World Cup, most of us had our designated seats there. It wasn’t as if the chair had ‘VVS Laxman’ written on it, but there was an understanding that I would occupy that space. Just as Sachin would take the seat next to me. That was our comfort zone, where we could gather our thoughts, go through our routines, put on the box, strap the left pad on first and then the right, dig into the coffin (as we call our kitbags) for gloves, thigh-pads, arm-guards and helmet. The entire process was cathartic. It was a deliberate distraction from what was to follow, designed to stop the mind from overanalysing and going into shutdown mode. It helped me immensely, at various places, but most tangibly at Eden.

To call Eden Gardens my theatre of dreams is an understatement. It provided the canvas for the pictures I wanted to paint, for the dreams I wanted to realise. Dreams that had taken shape a long, long time ago, when the cricket bug bit me and several others of my generation.