By the time we returned to India, retirement seemed imminent. It was only a question of when I would publicly announce my decision. I went to discuss the modalities with my uncle, but he immediately shot the idea down. ‘As a cricketer, you have always played for and with pride. Your pride has been severely dented by the last two overseas tours, but England and Australia are touring India this winter, and I think that is a sign,’ he said. ‘You should play those two series and do what you have always done—bounce back from setbacks. You can’t do that by retiring and sitting at home. You can only atone for hurt pride on the field. You have the chance to make amends almost immediately; you should play those two series and then retire.’

That made sense to me. Having never set individual goals such as playing X number of matches or scoring Y number of Test runs, my aspirations were more about being part of winning teams. I decided to channel my energies over the next year to being the best I could be so that the team could erase the bitter memories of our English and Australian misadventures.

Because I went unsold in the IPL auction, a long off-season beckoned during the summer of 2012. Our next assignment was against New Zealand in August, four months away, and I decided to use the unexpected downtime to work on my body. I went to the NCA in Bengaluru and had a frank chat with Ashish Kaushik, the physio at the academy. I told him that this was going to be my final year in cricket and I wanted to be the fittest I could be. Until then, I hadn’t found the time to work exclusively on my fitness, because of a packed international calendar and my recurring back issues.

Ashish was brilliant. Along with Sudarshan Sood, the trainer, he oversaw my training and fitness routines. I spent the better part of those four months at the NCA, working harder than I ever had. I put my cricket kit in cold storage, focusing more on fitness and less on skills. For the first three months, I didn’t hold a bat. Everything revolved around strengthening my back and the turning point was the introduction of Pilates, which I had never tried before. On Ashish’s insistence, the first month’s regimen was primarily focused on Pilates, followed by a heavy load of exercises to strengthen the legs, the upper back and the glutes. This was supplemented by plenty of running. Gradually, the mix of Pilates, conditioning, strength training and running made me stronger and leaner. When I picked up a bat after the three-month break, I felt incredibly good.

From 2010, I had had to change my stance and find a different posture, to counter the back spasms. That meant I had to crouch a lot more than I liked. After the NCA stint, I gingerly went back to a more upright stance, and found to my delight that I was pain-free. I struck the ball beautifully and felt good about my cricket. Zak, who was also at the NCA and who bowled plenty at me, was astonished at how brilliantly I was moving and hitting the ball. It felt good to be vindicated by a close friend and a top pro who didn’t mess around at the nets. Through all this, in one little compartment of the brain, the internal battle continued to rage. Should I continue to play through the coming home season that included ten Tests? Or was this the right time to go? Eventually, after much soul-searching, I made peace with myself—play the entire season, beat England and then Australia, and ride off into the sunset.

When I returned to Hyderabad after that deal with myself, I couldn’t wait for the cricket to start. After a long time, I played an HCA league match. The century was pleasing, but largely because I was moving easily, without pain and,  increasingly, without the fear of pain. As I ramped up my preparations for the first of ten Tests, against New Zealand in my hometown, I travelled with the Hyderabad team for the annual KSCA tournament. Our first match was against the hosts in Mysore. The final twist in the tale was to unfold there.  After the opening day against Karnataka, our head coach Sunil Joshi and fielding coach Noel David joined me for dinner in my hotel room. Noel picked up the crisp, unread copy of that day’s The Times of India lying near my door— the advent of the Internet had weaned me off newspapers—and spread it on the dining table. As sportspersons, we are habituated to reading the paper back to front, so Noel opened out the second- and third-last pages.

My good friend P Gopichand had returned from the London Olympics just the previous day with his ward Saina Nehwal, who had won the bronze medal. The left page was devoted to my two fellow Hyderabadis. There was a huge photo of them in an open jeep on their way from the airport to Gopi’s academy, and I was happy to see the coverage they were getting in the media. As my eyes skirted to the right, I saw my name in the headline of a column. I began reading it.

The columnist had written of the dilemma confronting the selectors ahead of the Test series against New Zealand. Should they rest me so that they could try out the youngsters—Rahul had announced his retirement from Test cricket— and bring me back for the England series, or should they pick me because I had been short of international runs the previous season and therefore needed an opportunity to regain my confidence? By the time I came to the end of the article, the festering battle within me had resumed.

However, that didn’t prevent me from concentrating on my cricket. I went on to get a big hundred against a good Karnataka attack, somehow maintaining my focus despite the mental turmoil. Immediately after the match, I drove down to the NCA and continued to work on my fitness. I also confided in Zak that I was confused and indecisive. Was I doing the right thing by Indian cricket in wanting to continue to play for one more season? Or was I depriving a youngster of the opportunity to find his feet in Test cricket in familiar conditions? Zak pointed out that I was fit and pain-free, and that I was batting well. That Virat and Pujara had already broken in, so there had already been an infusion of young blood. ‘Don’t overthink it,’ he cautioned. For reaffirmation, I then went to Ashish, and he immediately dismissed all talk of retirement. He reminded me of the work we had put in for four months on the trot, of how I had managed to improve my fitness and laid my back problems to rest. ‘Don’t even think about it,’ he said. Everything they were telling me made sense. But something continued to gnaw at me.

Despite speculation in the media and elsewhere, I was named in the squad for the two New Zealand Tests, in Hyderabad and Bangalore. The closer we got to the first Test, the more intense my inner battle became. I was still following my cricketing and fitness drills with diligence, but there was this constant question of what was right and what was not.

On the one hand, there was the exciting prospect of getting our own back against England and Australia. To be honest, the New Zealand matches didn’t even register. It was all about using them to prepare as well as possible for the two big series to follow in the winter. The wounds from our drubbings in those two lands were still fresh, and nothing less than twin victories could heal them. On the other hand, there was the pressure of my own values and ideals. Throughout my career, I had put the team’s interests above mine. In my heart of hearts, I began to believe that the time was ripe for me to step aside. That would give an inexperienced batsman 10 Tests at home to establish himself before India embarked on a succession of overseas tours, to South Africa, New Zealand, England and Australia.

The more I thought about it, the more strongly I felt that missing these last 10 Test matches would not affect me in any way. I was satisfied with how my career had panned out, and I didn’t feel the need to prove anything, least of all to myself. My only motivation for wanting to continue was to redress the wrongs of England and Australia, contribute to the team and go out on a high. But I also realised that if I didn’t retire now, and the Indian team went to South Africa and lost badly, and my replacement didn’t score runs, I would never be able to forgive myself. I had first-hand experience of how difficult playing overseas early in one’s career could be when I toured South Africa in late 1996. I didn’t want to impose that hardship on another young man. In many ways, it was a selfish decision to retire. It was more about what would make me happier. At the same time, I didn’t want my selfish and personal aspirations, contradictory as that might sound, to stymie the progress of a newcomer. The dilemma was eating away at my innards.

With the Test match less than a week away, decision time was imminent. My uncle insisted that I would be silly to announce my retirement now. My parents said that since I had already been named in the team and given the chance, I should continue to serve the country. My coaches were against my retirement, as was my good friend Parth. Sailaja encouraged me to do whatever I thought was best. Torn between the two options, I dashed to Chennai to meet Krishnamachari Srikkanth, and he said I must play the New Zealand series, no matter what. I had gone to Chennai seeking clarity. I came back even more confused.

I thought my vacillation had come to an end when, on returning to Hyderabad, I decided that since I had already been picked for the two New Zealand Tests, I would retire after the second game in Bangalore. That ought to have lifted the load, but I found no joy or succour. I called up Dr MV Sridhar, then secretary of the Hyderabad Cricket Association, and told him that I was considering having a press conference the following day, one day before the Indian squad was to assemble in Hyderabad for the Test match. I didn’t want my presser to be a distraction for the team, and wanted it over and done with before MS and the boys landed.

When I spoke to Doc, I was clear that I hadn’t made up my mind about whether I would go ahead with the press conference, let alone what I was going to say. I was keen that should the event happen, it must be at the Gymkhana Grounds in Secunderabad, a venue very dear to me. I also told Shivlal Yadav that I wanted him at the press meet, should it take place. I made the same request of my coaches.

Predictably, the media came to know that something was brewing and my phone kept ringing, unanswered, late into the night. It was well past midnight when I had final discussions with a couple of close friends, before settling into sleep.

When I woke up the following morning, it was with a sense of absolute clarity. The press meet was on, and I would retire with immediate effect. No sentimental farewell Test in Hyderabad, no final hurrah in front of family and friends. I broke the news to Sailaja, called up my parents, coaches, friends and teammates to inform them of the imminent retirement. Sachin was at the NCA, and tried to convince me to defer the press conference. I had seldom disregarded Sachin’s advice, but I respectfully told him that this time, I could not honour his sentiments. I told him repeatedly during our hour-long conversation that my mind was made up. That if I couldn’t commit myself 100 per cent—and I knew that I couldn’t—I didn’t see any point in playing. In any case, the New Zealand series had not been on my radar.

I left for the Rajiv Gandhi International Stadium in Uppal—Doc, who had  informed the media of the impending event, had insisted that it would be a better venue given the rains in the city—with Sailaja, the kids and my parents for my final public appearance as an active India player. We parked our car behind the South pavilion and walked across the ground to the North pavilion, where the media had assembled in large numbers. As we were walking in, I informed Sridhar, Shiv bhai and Venkatapathi Raju that I was going to retire immediately. They tried to talk me out of it and insisted that I should at least play in Hyderabad. As their words fell on deaf ears, Raju called up Javagal Srinath and handed him the phone. Sri gave me a bollocking as was typical, but I was an immovable object, by then totally firm and decisive.

After I informed the media of my decision to retire as of that day, the questions flowed.

‘Have you informed your teammates?’

‘Yes.’

‘Have you spoken to Dhoni, what did he have to say?’

‘Everyone knows how difficult it is to reach Dhoni,’ I joked.

Little did I realise that this would trigger the first and only controversy of my cricketing career.

I had tried contacting MS, but his number had changed after the Australia  tour. I had informed the board officials, the chairman of selectors and all my teammates, and I knew MS would understand when I met him in person in Hyderabad and explained why I could not inform him beforehand. But I had unwittingly provided fodder to the media, who started to speculate that I had retired in a huff because MS and I had differences, that there was a rift between us. It wasn’t funny at the time, but one of the headlines the following day read, ‘VVS, retired hurt.’

That was just the beginning of a nerve-wracking week. Once the team assembled in Hyderabad, the guys that I generally hung out with in the evenings on tour— Sachin, Zak, Viru and Gautam—asked me to come over to the team hotel. I knew the media would be there and my presence might set off a fresh wave of speculation. So I asked them to come home for dinner instead.

We had just moved into our new home, but work on it was far from finished. There was scaffolding on the stairs, the lawn was not ready. My initial plan had been to invite the entire team for dinner, but because the house wasn’t ready, I settled for the four guys with whom I usually spent the most time. Again, and I say this with respect, I was astonished by the perseverance of the media. Throughout my career, I had had an excellent relationship with media persons who, like the players, spent long months away from their families, chasing stories and interviews, exclusives and scoops. We had a healthy respect for each other, and I appreciated the hardships they put up with in distant lands with the many challenges of communication and transmission of stories and video feeds. They just don’t give up, and it came as no surprise to me to learn that they had gathered in large numbers outside the gate to our community while my friends were at dinner.

I wasn’t, however, prepared for the speculation that I had invited the entire team home—except MS. Not having experienced anything of this nature previously, I was aghast. Throughout my career, I had steered clear of controversy. But on my retirement, one controversy after another was taking  shape. Because all this was happening in our backyard, my parents were a little disturbed, and my father suggested that I call up MS and clear the air, even though there was nothing to clear.

I waited for the end of the Test and then went to the hotel to thank every teammate and member of the support staff individually. When I met MS, he took one look at me and burst out laughing. ‘Laxman bhai, you are not used to all these controversies, but I am. Don’t take this to heart. We all know that sometimes, facts need not come in the way of a good story.’ I was once again struck by his maturity, his simplicity, and how easily he had put me at ease. We had a good laugh, and I quickly called up my father to inform him that he could stop worrying. Even today, despite repeated denials, people tell me—not ask, but tell—that I retired because of MS. I have learnt not to be affected by it anymore. After a wonderful night’s sleep, when I woke up for the first time as a former India cricketer, I felt lighter. I told Sailaja that I was feeling good about my decision. Once again, I had listened to my inner voice, and it had not let me down. All my life, my actions had been dictated by this voice, but in conjunction with suggestions from those closest to me. This time, with greater maturity, I had gone entirely by it, disregarding advice from even my father. It was as if my inner voice had passed on God’s message to me. It was important for me that I woke up the morning following that momentous day—18 August 2012— convinced that I had made the right call. I was happy with the decision then, and after all these years, I remain happy with it. The only thing I didn’t expect was the week-long speculation and the unsavoury, baseless interpretations. It took the meaning out of my decision, but I chose not to dwell too much on something over which I had little control.

Often, sportspersons overstay their welcome because they are not prepared for a life beyond sport. Because you are so emotionally attached to your love, which in my case was cricket, you don’t want to leave it at all. But all good things must come to an end. As an elite athlete, you always feel that your best is yet to come. It’s tough to take that call, about when to retire. I was a few months shy of 38 when I walked away from international cricket, but as clichéd as it might sound, I firmly believe that age is nothing more than a number.

I have been told that I didn’t score in England and Australia because age had caught up with me. That’s rubbish. I failed in Australia not because of my age, but because of a technical problem that had crept in unnoticed. My head was dropping too much, so I was getting my front foot too far across, often having to play around it. I didn’t know where my off stump was, because I had lost sight of the basics. This, together with the fact that I was not batting with the enjoyment and freedom that are crucial for performing well, resulted in a string of low scores in Australia. It had nothing to do with not picking the ball early, or reacting to it late.

I didn’t retire because of extraneous forces and I wasn’t pushed into retirement. Yes, the article in The Times of India was the trigger, but that wasn’t the reason for my retirement. Throughout my career, I have received praise and criticism from various quarters. I was initially affected by what people thought of me, but with the passage of time, that stopped being a factor. I came to the conclusion that ultimately, you must do what is right by you, by your team and by your country. And, to this day, I know that I won the internal battle by making the right choice.

The contentment the morning after retirement came from three things. One, that I had made the right decision, keeping in mind my own values. The decision was more for myself than to please others. Two, that till the last day I played the game, I had given it all I had. And three, that I had been strong enough to make the right decision.

While I had retired from international cricket, I planned to see out the rest of the year playing for Hyderabad. One of my few unfulfilled wishes had yet to be seen through—to win the Ranji Trophy for Hyderabad. I wanted to play the season, do my best to drive the team, and also use the time to help out the youngsters. That didn’t go to plan either. I made a half-century in the first match against Punjab, but we lost by an innings. In the next game, against Madhya Pradesh, I scored 120 but we still ended up conceding the lead. While the results were a let-down, what was more alarming was that during my hundred at Uppal, the back spasms made an unwelcome reappearance. Since I was no longer a BCCI-contracted player, the NCA was a no-no, so I turned to the physio of the Hyderabad team for relief, with little effect. My back became hard as a rock, and the pain was excruciating. Sailaja was constantly on my case, asking me to explore the NCA option, and when I called up (BCCI president) Srinivasan sir, he was kind enough to accede to my request.

I returned to the NCA and spent four weeks in rehab. By the time I was free of pain, our season was over. Hyderabad had failed to qualify beyond the first stage. My playing career had come to an end. Just like that. It was not the fairy-tale ending that cricketers dream of, but to me it was a fairy-tale ending nonetheless, because I had stepped down on my own terms. It was an absolute honour and a rare privilege to have played for our country, for so long and with the blessings and support of so many. As a sportsperson, you will have both fulfilled and unfulfilled goals at the end of your career. So long as you are convinced that you gave your best day after day and did not look for shortcuts, you can allow yourself a pat on the back. If you brood over what did not happen, it will ruin the rest of your life.

It is important to remember how the journey unfolded rather than just what happened at its end. Whatever I am now is solely because of cricket. It has always been more than just a job or a profession. Whatever we do, we need to do it with total and complete devotion.

However fanciful it might sound, I still wanted to go back to studying. I wanted to get my MBBS degree, complete my master’s and follow in the footsteps of my parents. I knew I would be in my mid-40s before I could start practising, but I was fine with that. I sat down with Sailaja and my parents to discuss the future, when I ran into unexpected opposition. Sailaja pointed out that during my playing days, the kids in particular had had to make many sacrifices and spend time away from their father. If I pursued a degree in medicine, she said, it would mean another five years of commitment on my part, which wasn’t fair to the kids. Before I could react, my parents jumped in and backed Sailaja. They wanted me to be a good father, to spend more time with the children, to be with them every step of the way as they grew into adolescence. Sailaja had asked very little of me in our nine years of marriage. How could I say no to her now?

I did, however, want to remain linked with cricket. As a former India player, various avenues were available, but it was important to discover what could motivate me. I wanted to work out what would make me wake up with a smile in the morning and look forward to the day ahead. I didn’t want to do something just for the sake of doing it.

In the first year after retirement, I dabbled in a lot of enterprises while trying to understand what appealed to me the most. I dived into television commentary and writing columns, I took up coaching, I opened an academy. Each of them had its own appeal, and I enjoyed each role. All along, the driving forces in my life had been education and cricket. Through these new engagements, I found a way to fuel my second innings.

Being in the media helps me analyse the game from a neutral standpoint and share my thoughts with viewers. I have enjoyed my stints with the legends of yesteryear and been amazed at their insights into the game. I have taken those learnings into coaching and mentoring.

I run my own academy in Hyderabad with the objective of providing good infrastructure and programmes that will help kids get better at their game. The academy has three branches in different parts of Hyderabad so that aspiring players don’t end up spending too much time commuting in the increasingly heavy traffic. I am also a batting consultant with the Cricket Association of Bengal.

Dearest to me is the mentorship of the Sunrisers Hyderabad franchise. To be part of a team environment, to share my experiences with players from different parts of the world and to watch them improve is fulfilling. It’s a wonderful franchise to be a part of, with a deliberate emphasis on strong core values, team spirit and camaraderie. I have drawn on my career—the good and the not-so-good—and tried to provide an atmosphere of inclusiveness. Fortunately, Tom Moody (the head coach), Muttiah Muralitharan (the bowling coach) and I are on the same wavelength, and because our thinking is similar, the five-year association has been hugely satisfying.

At Sunrisers, we place a lot of emphasis on the team culture, and at auctions, we choose players who are likely to fit in. We assiduously avoid a superstar culture and make each player feel important and wanted. We pick players who we think will put personal aspirations aside if they come in the way of team goals, and I am delighted that we have got an overwhelming majority of the selections right. We might have won the title only once, but we take a lot of pride in the way we have played the game—with respect for cricket and our opponents, with aggression and positivity, flair and flamboyance, but also with common sense and intelligence.

Along the way, we have had our fair share of challenges, none more immediate and daunting than the last-minute loss of David Warner through suspension just before IPL 2018. We bestowed the leadership responsibility on Kane Williamson, and he rallied the troops beautifully. The transition was smooth because even though Kane hadn’t been a regular member of the eleven previously, he had always been an important member of our squad and had the respect of his colleagues. I am proud of the campaign we ran in making it to the final, a reaffirmation that if you do the right things, the results will automatically follow.My ultimate dream is to manage a school that will cater to the socioeconomically underprivileged. I was blessed to receive high-quality education in my formative years, which was the foundation for my success. Education and cricket together helped me overcome many an obstacle, and I am a firm believer that for kids to be successful in any endeavour, there can be no compromise on all-round development. With my parents’ blessings and the grace of the Almighty, I hope to translate my dream into reality.

As a small beginning, we started the VVS Foundation, which is Sailaja’s initiative. She is a philanthropist and supported the education of several economically deprived kids during my playing days. Once I called it a day, she felt we should approach the process in a more systematic way, which is how the Foundation came about. We support 92 children from the time they enter seventh grade to when they complete their graduation, but not merely financially. We want to be the bridge between these children and their goals, and we don’t want them to be short-changed because their parents aren’t financially equipped. We have an academic audit every quarter to understand their problems and then put corrective measures in place. Sailaja and I meet the kids twice every month, and we try to provide them with all the tools required to boost their confidence, to improve their communication skills and to rid them of stage fright. We also look after their health, with two mandated medical check-ups a year. It’s just a drop in the ocean, but it is a drop nevertheless that I hope to convert into a trickle, and then a flood.

We have also instituted a sports scholarship in my uncle’s name, the Baba Krishna Mohan Scholarship, which has till date been conferred on seven kids with talent and passion for cricket. We conducted selection trials in three districts in Telangana, and my friends who have played in the Ranji Trophy compiled an initial shortlist of 78. I then watched these kids play to identify the seven that I thought had the most potential and needed the scholarship the most. For the last two years, we have been financially supporting 30 students at IITs in different parts of the country. They receive the Satyaram Scholarship, named after my parents—Dr Satyabhama and Dr Shantaram. Whatever I am today, it’s entirely because of them. This is my humble way of saying thanks to my amma and nana.