I couldn’t stop smiling. I just couldn’t. The coach’s words were music to my ears.

Venkatesh Prasad and I had just returned to the pavilion, Australia having bowled us out for 171 in under 60 overs and asked us to follow-on. I was the last man dismissed, and had just sat down to remove my pads when a friendly hand came to rest lightly on my shoulder.

‘Don’t take your pads off, Lax.’

‘Oh! Why, John?’

You are going in at No. 3.’

My mind went blank. It took a few seconds for the message to sink in.

That’s when the smile surfaced. ‘Really, John?’

By this time, John Wright too was caught up in the mini drama playing out between the two of us. ‘Really, Lax.’ Our coach’s weather-beaten face opened up in a crinkly smile.

I wasn’t obsessed with the No. 3 slot. Rahul Dravid had been doing a fantastic job in that position, and I recognised that individual desires and aspirations always came second to the team’s needs and goals.

But I loved batting at No. 3. It freed up my mind. I felt extremely comfortable walking out at the fall of the first wicket. I had been occupying that position for nearly five years for Hyderabad, in the Ranji Trophy. If I had the option, I would always bat at No. 3.

And here was the opportunity to do that for Team India. I had batted twice at one-drop in Test cricket: in Adelaide in December 1999—a handy 41 in the first innings, followed by a first-ball duck in the second. I didn’t think about that. Neither did I think about the fact that we were 0–1 in this Test series, against Steve Waugh’s all-conquering Australians, who were now targeting an unprecedented 17th consecutive Test win. Or that we had been wiped out inside three days in the preceding game in Mumbai. Or that we were 274 behind in the first innings of this Test and had been asked to follow-on. I just didn’t think about anything.

On a high after that chat with John, I looked around our silent dressing room and was greeted by tense, apprehensive faces. We were so far behind the eight ball and the tunnel that stared us in the face seemed long, dark and foreboding. But while we were not exactly full of beans, we had no intention of rolling over and allowing the Aussies to walk all over us. 

As a No. 3, you have to be mentally prepared to take guard to the second ball of the innings. You are always a little bit on edge, willing the openers to see off the new ball, at the very least. You are looking for cues—the rhythm of the bowlers, the behaviour of the ball, how the pitch is playing, what is the biggest threat to your continued presence at the batting crease. I was doing all of this, of course, but with a pretty open mind; I didn’t want to go out predetermined and prejudiced. That would have been against every instinct I had followed until then.

The Mumbai Test the preceding week had been a bit of a wipe-out. Though Sachin Tendulkar had made two brilliant half-centuries and Harbhajan Singh had threatened briefly when he had Australia on the mat at 99 for 5, Matthew Hayden and Adam Gilchrist had taken the game away from us with counterattacking centuries. We marvelled at their courage and their bruising strokeplay, but we were far from overawed. Even without Anil Kumble, who was recovering from a shoulder surgery, we felt we had the resources to get the better of Australia. As dispiriting as the Mumbai defeat was, we didn’t think it was a true indication of the strengths of the two teams.

Between the Mumbai and the Kolkata Tests, I had watched a couple of movies and then gone to Shirdi to pray to Sai Baba. Spirituality has been my constant companion since childhood. That, coupled with the environs in which I grew up and the lessons I learnt by observing my grandfather and my parents, has given me an equanimity and a calmness that has always helped me tide over moments of crisis, of which there were several as my career unfolded. The more I look back at the Eden Test, the more my belief in fate and destiny is strengthened. I don’t say this merely because we battled the odds and came out triumphant. Had things not worked out the way they did in the lead-up to the game, I might not even have been available to take the field.

My classmate from school, Amit Mohan Lal, had accompanied me on the Shirdi visit after the three-day drubbing in Mumbai. During the journey, I kept asking questions—of myself, and Shirdi Sai Baba too. I had done everything in my control, so why this test by fire? Where was it that I had been found wanting? I had committed myself totally to my dream, I had left no stone unturned, so why this treatment? Why were the runs not coming? Why was I in and out of the team? What more could I do?

These were the questions that repeatedly flitted to the top of my mind. They weren’t anguished, aggressive, angry queries. I was confused more than anything else, because I felt I deserved better if only for my utter dedication to my craft, to my sport, to my team and country. As we settled into the journey, I closed my eyes and rested the back of my head on the top of my seat. Instantly, as if someone had switched on a projector, my entire life ran through my mind’s eye. I saw myself as a young kid, leaving home with my oversized kitbag in tow in Abids, walking to the bus stop to take the bus to practice. I saw the hours and hours of practice, I watched myself play every ball in every competitive game of cricket I had played. It was surreal, but it was also oh-so-real. I had gone through a similar experience in Melbourne in late 1999, ahead of my 167 in Sydney the following week. But that was the last thing on my mind as we embarked on the journey to Shirdi.

After a peace-filled few hours, we drove back to Mumbai, and I then flew out to Hyderabad. By this time, I was ready to visit any temple to seek divine intervention. I wasn’t desperate. I wasn’t putting my fate in the hands of the Almighty because that would have been taking the easy way out. But I wanted to find a certain equilibrium, some peace of mind, before I went to Kolkata. Hence, at the suggestion of my uncle, I drove to two different temples during my short stint in Hyderabad between the Mumbai and Kolkata Tests.

Somewhat comforted by these trips, I followed the routine I undertook before embarking on any cricketing tour—a visit to my maternal grandparents’ house for a meal, a session at the St John’s camp adjacent to their home in Secunderabad, and a stint with Ashok Singh, my batting coach, before heading to the airport. Thus I came to Kolkata, having travelled much in a short span of time, with my mind a lot more uncluttered but still a little unsettled. Those days, we used to stay two to a room. In Mumbai I had roomed with Sadagopan Ramesh, the beautiful-to-watch and fun-loving Tamil Nadu opener. Ramesh and I knew each other from our domestic cricket days and got along famously. His only grouse was that my half of the room, which he said resembled a mini temple, was so neatly maintained that it made his half look even more ramshackle! Ramesh was quite a character, just as he was quite a batsman when in full flow.

When I checked into the hotel, I discovered that Ramesh wasn’t my roommate this time. Instead, it was to be Zaheer Khan. I wasn’t amused. Like many others, I am a creature of routine, and I knew what to expect from Ramesh the roomie. Zaheer was young, new, an unknown. ‘Who made this arrangement?’ I half-snapped at the receptionist, aware that I was being unreasonable.

‘Mr John Wright, sir,’ came the hesitant, semi-fearful reply. I told her to patch me through to John, and asked him, somewhat irritated, about the change in plans. ‘No more seniors and juniors, Lax,’ he said. ‘If we must play and win as a team, we must also learn to stay as a team. We must all get used to each other. This is how it’s going to be from here on.’ That was that, really. Still in a huff, I bolted up to my room, not knowing what to expect over the next week from a young lad as different from me as chalk is from cheese. But what was I to know? That was the start of a wonderful friendship, a mutual bond of respect and affection that has grown stronger with time. On the face of it, Zak and I are probably what people would call an odd couple. We are very different from each other and have entirely different attitudes to life.

Zak is more laidback and does things at his own pace. It wasn’t that he wasn’t goal-oriented, but while many of us were regimented, he was not. I am an introvert and even now, I don’t feel entirely comfortable in a crowd. Zak, by contrast, is an excellent host who loves having people around. I was an early riser and followed a rigorous routine. Zak lay in bed for as long as he could, because all he needed to get ready was five minutes. Our eating habits were different too. I am a strict vegetarian and he is not. When someone asks me to explain our chemistry, I really don’t have an answer. It’s just one of those things —you hit it off immediately with some people, and that’s what happened with Zak and me. But at that moment, I was still adjusting to the idea of sharing a room with someone unfamiliar.

Three days before the Test, during our first practice session, I felt a searing pain in my lower back after having batted for no more than six or seven minutes. I had been having backaches on and off for the last year or two, but that episode was painful enough that I had to stop batting right away. Later that evening, I limped across to meet our physio Andrew Leipus in his room.

‘Can you just look at my back and fix it, Andrew?’ I asked him. ‘A little bit of pain, but nothing serious. I should be good to go soon.’ Andrew looked at me, flabbergasted. ‘Nothing serious, Lax? Have you looked at yourself?’

I hadn’t. I hauled myself over to the mirror and was stunned by what I saw. It was as if my upper and lower body were two independent entities. The upper body was pulling in a direction of its own, slanting to the left. All along, I had thought I had been standing and walking upright, so this was a spectacular shock. Like a damaged ship taking in water, I was ‘listing’ to my left. It was serious alright. A disc had slipped, and each time it scraped against a nerve, it sent pain shooting through me. 

‘But you can fix this, right, Andrew?’

‘Let’s see how it goes.’

I didn’t like that answer. I was looking for something along the lines of,

‘Of course, Lax.’

So, a little more strident, a little more insistent, I said, ‘Tell me you can fix this, Andrew.’ There was a salty taste in my mouth. I didn’t even realise I had started to cry.

Perhaps it was the sight of a grown man weeping that did the trick, for Andrew said something like, ‘Should be alright, I am sure.’ That was good enough for me. John and Sourav had to be told there was an issue, of course, but I was determined not to miss the game. I went to the ground with the rest of the team the following day, but all I did was walk gingerly along its circumference. Keeping a close watch was Hemang Badani, who had been with Andrew when I first hobbled into his room to seek assistance. Had I been ruled out, Hemang would have taken my place in the middle order. He looked on as I stumbled around Eden—no jogging, no running, let alone batting. The next day—just a day before the match—I was better. Not one hundred per cent, maybe a little over sixty per cent, but I was getting better. I faced a few throw-downs at the nets, I was moving reasonably well, the pain was minimal. I was good to go. I still believe it was Andrew who made that classic at Eden Gardens possible. He gave me a fresh lease of life, perhaps moved by my tears. Thank you, Andrew, I will always owe you one!

As the third innings started, on 13 March 2001, Eden Gardens was a heaving, throbbing, buzzing sea of humanity, like it always is. There was disappointment that India was so far behind in the match, but there was also a sense of anticipation. It helped that Sourav Ganguly, a son of the soil, was our captain. It helped too, that Sachin Tendulkar, the worker of miracles, was in the mix. As I sat, padded up, helmet in place, I watched Ramesh and Shiv Sundar Das start off what was to be one of the most memorable third innings of a Test match. Ramesh and Dasi weren’t quite what you would call veterans, though Ramesh had made his debut two years ago in the high-pressure cauldron of India–Pakistan Test cricket. With us so far behind on the first innings, all we could do was bat the way we knew how, without taking the scoreboard into consideration.

That’s something we talked about a lot, but it is easier said than done. You try and break things down, keep them simple, but it is inevitable that from time to time, you will lapse into negativity.

We needed a decent start to settle our nerves. Australia had a formidable attack—Glenn McGrath, Jason Gillespie, Shane Warne and Michael Kasprowicz, who was considered something of an India specialist—and we hadn’t even touched 200 in the first three innings of the series. So, when the openers put on 52, batting for a little over an hour, a sense of calm gradually descended over the dressing room.

The dressing room was our sanctuary. It was where we could be ourselves, with our extended family, let off steam, indulge in banter and leg-pulling, have discussions and debates, and sometimes even arguments. A healthy dressing room is one where people might have different points of view, but are moving in the same direction.

When we lost Ramesh to Warne, I sprang off my chair, a tingle running through me. I had dreamed of knocks that would bail the team out of trouble and end in my being hailed as a hero, but that was about it. As I strode out past a slightly bemused Ramesh who, like the rest of the audience, had perhaps expected Rahul to bat at No. 3, I was determined to live every moment. Over the years, I have always enjoyed my battles with the Aussies. I suppose it has to do with how they play their cricket—aggressively and with passion, always positive and looking to assert themselves. I had played against the likes of Brett Lee and Andrew Symonds at the Under-19 level, and I admired them. The attacking fields they set gave me additional scoring opportunities and I loved that the extra pace allowed the ball to come on to my bat, and speed off it, that much quicker. In hindsight, it’s not surprising that my first Test hundred came against them in Sydney in early 2000, with my place on the line and our backs to the wall.

There is a certain comfort in squaring off against an opposition that you have scored runs off. I had been in good touch in domestic cricket coming into this series, and had enjoyed my first-innings outing at Eden when I made 59 and which probably hastened my elevation to No. 3. I saw this as an opportunity to make the most of my recent form.

Sure enough, Dasi and I built up a little partnership, and even at that early stage, I felt I was in a good space. The ball was hitting the middle of my blade, my feet were moving nicely to Warne in particular, and my mind was blank. Even when Dasi and Sachin fell in quick succession, I wasn’t perturbed. We had plenty of batting to come, and I have always been the kind of person who sees the glass as half full rather than half empty.

But we needed a partnership to steady the ship. At 115 for 3, we were in trouble. We were under no illusions. Sourav and I had a job on our hands, especially against an attack that had sensed blood and was primed to move in for the kill.

Sourav didn’t have a great series with the bat, but that afternoon, he was in excellent touch. In all my cricketing life, I haven’t seen a better driver of the ball through the off-side. Sourav did so with effortless ease, all languid left-handed elegance and economy of movement. As he shredded the bowling, the crowd got into it. As our partnership topped the 100-run mark and we closed in on the deficit, the crowd’s hopes started to magnify.

When Sourav fell in the final hour of the third day, a hush descended over Eden. Not only had their favourite son fallen short of a half-century, but we were still 42 runs in arrears. Despite the fightback, we were way behind the game. The fans started to troop out of the stadium, aware that we needed a miracle. By the time Rahul came out and took guard, half the stadium had emptied.

Rahul and I haven’t discussed it since, but I am sure he must have been a little miffed at having been replaced at No. 3. The team man that he is, not for one moment did he make obvious his displeasure, if any, at being pushed down to No. 6. That was Rahul’s trademark throughout his career, something I have so admired and enjoyed—he was ready to do whatever the team asked of him. If it was to keep wicket in one-day cricket, he was game. If he needed to open the batting in Test matches, however much he didn’t like doing so, he was willing. And if it meant having to relinquish his preferred No. 3 slot in a Test, so be it. So Rahul walked in on the third evening, a little under the weather from a viral fever. Rahul and I have always enjoyed batting with each other. In many ways, we are similar—in our mental approach, if not in our batting. We could both take the situation out of the equation, we could go hours without a long conversation, but we were always there for each other with a quiet word—not so much advice as encouragement. The role of a partner is important, but in matches like these, it becomes so much more critical. It is two against eleven out in the middle and the two batsmen must be on the same page. You must look after not just your own self but also the partnership to ensure that you remain focussed and single-minded. That’s what happened with Rahul and me. Our first goal was to see out the day, and we did so without too much fuss. I brought up my second Test hundred along the way.

The Aussies are acknowledged as the masters of sledging, but seldom have I been at the receiving end. When they did talk to me, much of it was funny rather than intimidating or abusive. As I scrambled for the single that took me to my century, Steve Waugh sauntered in from cover and muttered, ‘Now the young man’s mind must be busy thinking about endorsements.’ I found it amazing that even in the heat of battle, Steve could come up with something like that.

During my playing days, I seldom bothered about numbers and felt that the runs against my name were meaningless if they didn’t help the team win, or at least pull off a draw. It is only in hindsight that I regret my inability to convert more of my half-centuries into three-figure knocks. 

When I made this hundred, a year after my first hundred in Sydney, I was certainly happy. But I also remembered what had happened in Sydney despite my 167. I didn’t want a repeat of that result, so I went to bed that evening determined to kick on the next morning. Not thinking runs, not thinking scores, just thinking time. We had to bat on. And on. And on. Little did I, or anyone else, know what was in store.

Even though we were still 20 runs behind Australia, Eden appeared boisterous and exuberant when we reached the ground on the fourth morning. From hopeful onlookers the previous day when we were asked to follow-on, the Eden crowd had transformed into an electric entity. I was a little tired, having already spent nearly eight hours in the middle across two innings, but I was high on adrenaline. A little bit of fatigue wasn’t going to hold me back. And on the odd occasion when my concentration flagged as it usually does on a hot, humid March afternoon in Kolkata, Rahul was quickly in my ear, reminding me that the job was far from finished, that I couldn’t afford to relax for even a second. ‘Job not done’ was to become the most frequently used phrase during our long alliance.

And so we carried on, two friends breaking things down to 10-over periods, setting small goals and never, ever looking at the scoreboard. We were still so far behind that for most of the day, our only aim was survival. The longer we could keep the Aussies on the park, the better our chances of salvaging a draw.

Thus the first hour came and went, and Rahul and I were still in the middle. Then came lunch, and we walked back unconquered, feeling just the tiniest bit of satisfaction that we were still unseparated, still battling away, still thwarting the best Australia could throw at us. Along the way had come little milestones—my 150, then my highest Test score, Rahul’s 50. And, most crucially, a lead now of 102. Even though we had placed a great deal of onus on not throwing our hand away, we had added 122 runs in 29 overs. I was flying, having added 62 to my overnight 109. Rahul wasn’t too far behind.

That session was massive from our point of view, not just for having come away unscathed but also for the runs scored in what was a crucial phase of the game. It helped, of course, that despite the regularity with which the runs came, Steve Waugh continued to set attacking fields, always looking for a wicket instead of trying to merely staunch the flow of runs.

We had multiple challenges to overcome. The second new ball was due, and there stood McGrath and Gillespie, chomping at the bit, determined to make the most of the hard, shiny cherry. While there wasn’t much swing on offer, both men were masterly at bowling in the corridor, asking questions repeatedly and ready to pounce on the first indiscretion. My plan against the two was simple— just play in the ‘V’ (the arc between mid-on and mid-off), play the drives, and cut out horizontal strokes as much as possible. I was determined not to get bogged down and go into my shell, because especially to the Aussies, that was a sign of weakness. I knew pretty much what to expect from McGrath and Gillespie, and I had come prepared. I knew there would also be the odd bumper, and I was armed with the pull. The trueness of the bounce meant I could play the stroke without too much risk; as a game plan, it was sound and backed by logic. The actual challenge lay in the execution, and I was fortunate that my mind and body were in such good sync that it was possible to play exactly the way I had visualised it.

After the McGrath–Gillespie new-ball test came the Kasprowicz–Warne threat. Kaspers was a brilliant exponent of the reverse swing, and because he got the ball to tail in so late, he was extremely dangerous. The scoring areas against him were fairly restricted for me—from the right of mid-off to the left of midwicket. It was almost as if the rest of the ground did not exist. There were drives and whips to leg, but off a very straight bat. Kaspers needed careful watching and very precise shot selection.

Warney, of course, was Warney, the master showman and the ultimate practitioner of the difficult art of leg-spin. He loved the stage, he loved the attention. And he loved it when he got the ball to drift. That meant he could get the ball to shape in to the right-hander, and break it away wickedly on pitching. If you played across the line, you were leaving yourself open to being embarrassed—a leading edge, bowled behind your pads, bowled around your legs. . .

Since I was in such great touch from the domestic season, I decided to take the fight to Warney. I had made up my mind to attack him even before the series started, and I knew that I had to be extremely sure of my footwork. Whenever he tossed the ball up and got it to drift, I was down the track in a flash, either driving against the spin, wide of mid-on, or with the turn through the off-side. Occasionally, to deliveries of the same length, I would go deep into the crease and play the pull shot. The idea was to throw Warney off his rhythm and not allow him to settle down. It worked beautifully; the more he bowled, the less bite there was. The revs on the ball became less and less pronounced. His tiring shoulder meant the ball was coming that much slower through the air. It was that battle against Warney that was the highlight of the innings for me. Not at that time, no, because there simply was no scope to think along these lines. But when I look back on that innings, on that day, it is that face-off that stands out. Adam Gilchrist hardly spoke to batsmen from behind the stumps, but I clearly remember him clapping for a couple of my shots. ‘Oh, it’s almost like the Don is batting,’ he said more than once. Had I not been so focussed, I might have figured out if he meant it genuinely or was trying to get under my skin, but knowing Gilly, I am sure it must have been the former. One shot I remember with particular fondness: going down the track to Warney bowling from round the stumps into the rough well outside the leg stump, and hitting him inside-out along the ground through cover.

As we went into the dressing room during lunch, there were the regulation pats on the back, a scrub-down, a shower—I have the not unfounded reputation of hitting the shower at every possible opportunity—but nothing else. It was as if a spell had been cast, and everyone was fearful of breaking its magical, mysterious and intangible hold. It wasn’t as if the guys were walking on eggshells, but conversation wasn’t loud or animated. Rahul and I, of course, weren’t fussed about all this. Our focus was on going out there and batting on. And on. And on.

And we did. Lunch to tea was a blur. By then, Australia were tiring, and so were we, but ours was the kind of nice tiredness you look forward to. It’s the phase when there is a pleasurable pain coursing through your body. I have heard people talk about being in the zone. It applies not only to sportspeople but also to all professionals, no matter their field. You are almost enveloped by this otherworldly feeling, floating outside of yourself even as you are going about your business. It is that rare, dream-like phase when, as a batsman, the ball goes where you want it to go—an obedient little red orb happy to do your bidding. We should have been knackered because it was so hot and humid. Add to that the packed stands, the length of our partnership, the mental toll that the early part of that association had taken on us, and we ought to have been on our last legs. But looking at how much more hard-worn the Australians were, both physically and psychologically, we kept egging each other on. And, believe it or not, I was feeling fresh as a daisy. I don’t sweat much in any case, and my back was behaving itself, thank you very much. Throughout the length of my innings, I only used three shirts—one each on the third evening, the fourth day and the fifth morning. Just the one pair of batting trousers, a size larger than necessary but essential because the thigh-pad goes in and you don’t want to be constricted. Plus, exactly two pairs of gloves during those ten and a half hours at the crease. I told you, I don’t really sweat that much.

As we went in to tea, we would have been singing and dancing were we that way inclined. Rahul had gone past his century, and his animated celebrations showed just how much it meant to him, both from a personal and a team point of view. Rahul is one of the most composed individuals I have come across in any walk of life, seldom given to shows of emotion. But as he on-drove Warne to get to his century, he whipped his helmet off, angrily punched the air and pointed his bat in the direction of the commentators’ box. I had never seen that side of Rahul before, in several years of playing cricket together. He told me later that there had been a lot of pent-up emotion that had needed release after a demanding battle. I knew that was only half the story, but it’s one for Rahul to elaborate on, not me.

Even as Rahul was serenely making his way to his hundred, I breezed past my first Test double. It was a heady feeling, especially given the circumstances. As we entered the dressing room during tea break, with our lead now well past 200, we immediately sensed that the atmosphere had changed dramatically. There were no nervous giggles, no tense faces. Instead, there was a tremendous sense of optimism and a genuine belief that we were onto something special. I had my mandatory shower, which temporarily freshened me up, and when we returned to the field after 20 minutes, the onus had shifted from survival to remaining unconquered at the stumps.

Rahul had also come into the game somewhat undercooked, like me, with no practice for the two days leading into the Test because of a viral fever. As we went deep into the final session, his fatigue began to become more and more pronounced. Our running between the wickets suffered somewhat—some would say it was never a thing of beauty to start with—but we still scored enough boundaries. Shortly after tea, I went past Sunil Gavaskar sir’s Indian record for the highest individual score in a Test match—236 not out—and I really didn’t know how to react. I knew I had passed that milestone because the message was flashed loud and clear on the giant screen at the ground and the crowd reacted like only the Eden crowd can, but how was I to celebrate getting past a legend? In the end, I settled for a wave of the bat and a somewhat embarrassed smile. As if anybody could get past Sunny bhai.

As the runs mounted, the Aussies brought their part-timers on. In hindsight, that is the phase when we should have cashed in, when I should have kicked on. But being the traditionalists that we are, we batted for stumps, we batted to come out the next morning, and I think that probably cost me my triple hundred. I am not saying this with any bitterness or disappointment. But it was a trick we missed out on, something I realise all these years later but failed to spot then. That apart, we had scored with heavy punches, not just on the scoreboard, but also on the mental landscape. For the first time, the Aussies showed signs of cracking. We stored those notes away, aware that the guys in the dressing room were equally clued in.

Stumps couldn’t come quickly enough, for Rahul or me, and for the Australians. We sauntered back to a standing ovation from the Eden faithful and from our dressing room, now buoyant and walking on air. There were no heavy thuds on the back because you could have knocked both of us over with a feather. We just stumbled into the changing room, managed to get our gear off with great difficulty, and immediately hit the treatment table. All day long, we had worn ice-cold hand-towels around our necks in an effort to beat the heat; by the time stumps were called, we were bushed beyond imagination. But it was all worth it; the scoreboard read: India 589/4, Laxman 275*, Dravid 155*.

At the best of times, Rahul finds rehydration a challenge and that evening he had to be hooked up to a drip. I received a rigorous massage to get the circulation going in my legs and dragged myself around till I hit the bed. It’s probably my imagination, but I went to bed with a smile on my face that night. After all, we were 315 runs to the good. Maybe, just maybe. . .

When play resumed on the final morning, the idea was to bat for an hour and then stick Australia back in. We were wary of the might of the Aussie batting, the surface was still a pretty decent one, and we didn’t want all our hard work and fightback to go in vain by setting Australia a target too soon, only to watch them run away with the game.

One hour meant enough time for me to get to my 300, but fate had something else in store. Australia started to bowl wide outside the off stump, clearly intent on denying us runs and stalling the progress of the scoreboard as much as possible. Rahul got a few off the middle of the bat early on, and I was also looking to get on with it. It never occurred to me to play it safe and get to where no Indian had gotten before—a Test triple century. Do I regret reaching for the ball well outside off stump from McGrath and spooning it to point? Should I have batted out that one hour at my disposal and ticked off the 25 needed to get to the Promised Land? No, and no. I have never played my cricket that way. We had a specific goal—to get as many as possible in that one hour. The individual milestone would have been terrific, but if I were to get the chance to replay that day, I would do exactly the same.

I walked off the park immensely satisfied. I hadn’t missed out on 300 by 19 runs; I had made 281, in a crisis, with our backs to the wall, and put the team in a position from where we could expect to pull off a win against all odds. Isn’t that what you play the game for?

By the time Sourav called the boys in, we had made 657 for 7. The Eden crowd had acquired a life of its own, its energy sensationally infectious, a wonderfully energising force. Sixty-eight had been added to the overnight tally, and Australia needed 384 to seal the series. We had 75 overs to get ten wickets and conclude a famous win. Where were we headed?

Like they always do, Australia came out full of beans and positivity. Hayden and Michael Slater saw off the new ball, and then settled down against Harbhajan, who had taken India’s first Test hat-trick in the first innings and was shouldering the responsibility extraordinarily well for one so young, in Anil’s absence. Bhajji picked up Slater, finally, after a stand of 74, but then Justin Langer came in and really scared us. He breezed to 28 off just 21 deliveries, temporarily rocking us and forcing Sourav to go on the defensive a little. Did we play it wrong? Had we given Australia the opening they were so exceptional at exploiting? But Langer’s high-risk approach was always one ball away from disaster and Bhajji—who else—produced that delivery for Ramesh to hold on to the catch. One wicket led to two as Venkatapathi Raju, my Hyderabad mate, produced a wonderful arm-ball that pinged Mark Waugh in front for a ten-ball blob. We now dared to hope. Australia needed 268, we needed 7 wickets in a little under 45 overs. The scales had tilted our way, but there was still plenty to do.

Hayden had been a thorn in our side all through the series. He had followed up a century in Mumbai with 97 in the first innings in Kolkata, and appeared set to atone for missing out on his hundred as he linked up with Steve Waugh. Hayden had come to India ahead of the tour to work on his game against spin, and had mastered the sweep shot, which he employed to great effect. He wasn’t the only obstacle in our march towards victory, but we knew that it would be a massive boost for us and a huge blow for Australia if we could get rid of him.

Hayden and Steve batted on till tea, but as we entered our sanctuary, we felt we were onto something good. All of us had played enough to know how quickly things can change in the subcontinent, especially on the final day. We kept the faith, we remained positive, we could sense the energy and excitement in each other. But we were also mindful that we needed to hold our nerve and our catches, that we couldn’t get ahead of ourselves.

It took Bhajji just 14 deliveries after tea to break through—Steve brilliantly caught at leg slip by Hemang, the substitute. By this time in the series, Ricky Ponting was a walking wicket as far as Bhajji was concerned. He lasted just four deliveries, out without scoring, and we could spot the light—not as distant as it had been at tea.

But Hayden was still around, with an equally destructive Gilchrist for company. We had felt their fury in Mumbai, and while we weren’t apprehensive, we weren’t taking anything for granted. Maybe we should have. After all, Sachin had the ball in his hand.

Sachin whirled away, a wicked grin on his face, a sparkle in his eyes. I must confess that I have enjoyed watching him bowl as much as I have loved seeing him take bowling attacks apart. He responded with unbridled joy when the captain threw him the ball, usually when things weren’t going our way. Invariably, he delivered, and he celebrated with such gusto that it instantly transported you to the time when you played the game the way it should be played—for sheer enjoyment.

Sachin’s three-wicket burst on the final afternoon broke the back of the Australian middle order and was one of several highlights of an action-packed, emotion-soaked day.

If Sachin had paid more attention to his bowling, he could have turned out to be a world-class leg-spinner. World-class any bowler, for that matter. He could get the ball to swing, to seam. He could bowl excellent off-breaks, and his command over leg-spin and the googly was mesmeric. That evening, he decided that the Eden gathering deserved a veritable exhibition of wrist-spin, so he turned on the magic like only he could.

Three balls after Ponting’s dismissal went Gilly, trapped in front by Sachin on the sweep with a ripping leg-break. Next over, Hayden fell in a similar fashion. As umpire SK Bansal’s finger shot upwards, the Eden crowd erupted. Only the formalities remained. Their joy knew no bounds when Sachin outfoxed Warne in his next over, with a superb googly that the Sheikh of Tweak barely saw, let alone read. Pinged in front, Warney walked back sheepishly; it wasn’t just Sachin the batsman who gave him nightmares.

We couldn’t wait for the end, for the scramble for souvenirs, for the comfort of the dressing room and each other’s arms, for the celebration of relief and delight. Bhajji fittingly finished things off with his 13th wicket of the game and we all sought each other out, embracing and back-slapping. There was the odd tear or two, but most of us were beside ourselves with joy. We knew we had been a part of history. That we had made history. But at that point, we weren’t really aware of what this win would do to Indian cricket, to the psyche of the Indian player.

Many people came up to congratulate me, but it is all a blur. Sourav was speechless, for once. He just hugged me tight; there was no need for words, really. John was a little more vocal. ‘I always knew that you had the potential. I am glad you showed this to the world,’ he said.

Champagne flowed in the dressing room, but we had to rush off to the hotel almost immediately. For some reason, we had a flight to catch to Chennai that night even though the next Test was a few days away and the Aussies weren’t leaving Kolkata until the following morning. We cut a cake at the hotel, quickly packed our bags and left for the airport, drained but elated, refusing to stop smiling. As we entered the aircraft, the other passengers stood up and clapped so hard and so long that the cheers still reverberate in my ears. Life was good.

