19 November 1996. I was trembling with nervous anticipation as I stood on a chair and looked down at the audience.

This wasn’t something I had anticipated when I was selected to play for the country. Sourav had been unavailable due to injury and Sanjay Manjrekar had decided to open the innings. I had been selected along with Pankaj Dharmani to fill the middle-order spots that had opened up. Pankaj and I had driven down to Ahmedabad from Baroda after playing for the Board President’s XI against the South Africans.

We had all been herded into our coach Madan Lal’s suite for the customary team meeting, the evening before the start of the Test series against South Africa. I had had two solid batting sessions with the team in the lead-up to the Test match in Ahmedabad, and had been reasonably confident after the match-eve stint that I would make my debut the following day. Madan Lal announced the playing eleven and the team broke into spontaneous applause. When ‘Laxman’ rolled off his tongue, I beamed uncontrollably, my eyes glistening with unshed tears. This was it, then, eight weeks after I was first picked for the Indian squad. As was the tradition then, I was asked to address my mates. There was Sachin Tendulkar, our captain and a role model, even though he was from my generation. There was Azzu bhai, my hero and inspiration. Anil Kumble, already a proven match-winner. Javagal Srinath, a senior member and prankster if ever there was one. And Rahul Dravid, who had been my good friend for a long time by then.

Overwhelmed as I was, I struggled to put words together. Then Srinath piped up, ‘Show some respect, man. Stand on the chair and talk to us.’ That put me at ease. A little bit. I climbed up on the chair gingerly, a wide gamut of emotions running through me, ecstasy the foremost one. I launched into a serious monologue about how much this meant to me, how emotional I was, what an honour it was to represent the country. My lips couldn’t keep pace with my racing mind, and I tripped over the words. Before I could make much headway, the guys got together and shut me down. ‘Don’t be so sentimental,’ someone shouted. The rest was drowned out in laughter and controlled mayhem.

My first few months with the Indian Test team were a proverbial roller coaster ride. It was surreal, yet all too real, to experience glorious highs and crippling lows, both from the team’s and a personal point of view. I experienced what it was like to be part of a winning setup, and I realised how confusing it could be for a newcomer when the team was not doing well. I learnt, with a lot of help, that if you were not a part of the playing eleven, you had to find ways to keep yourself prepared and ready for any eventuality. I figured out that there was no safety net if you fell down. I grasped the significance of victory, and I understood why the team was so afraid of defeat. 

My first taste of the Indian dressing room as a member of the Test team was at Feroze Shah Kotla in Delhi, for a one-off Test against Australia in October. Prior to the Kotla game, I had played for the Board President’s XI against the Aussies in Patiala. By then, the Test squad had already been announced, so I approached the Patiala game without any nerves or unease. I had always been a huge fan of the brand of cricket the Australians played, and several of my favourite cricketers were Australian—the Waugh twins, Steve and Mark, and Mark Taylor. We were all to stay in the same hotel, and I was keen to see these guys in the flesh. But the Aussies were to reach Patiala only the day before the match. I requested the hotel manager to inform me when they arrived, but as evening gave way to night, I drifted off to sleep.

It was nearly 9 p.m. when the phone in my hotel room rang. The Aussies had arrived! I quickly got up and stepped out of my first-floor room, from where I could see them at the check-in counter. I stood there for a long time, just soaking it all in. They were the first senior international side I would be playing against. It was better to get the awe out of the way quickly.

I made only 36 in that weather-affected drawn game in Patiala, then joined the Test team in the national capital, aware that the chances of a debut were minimal. As I was checking in at the Taj Palace hotel in Delhi, the receptionist told me that I would be sharing a room with Azzu bhai. This was too good to be true!

I waited and waited for Azzu bhai to walk into the room, but it was to be a long and fruitless wait. Later, I came to know that he was miffed at having to share a room. He had been the captain, after all, till a month ago. He apparently told the team management that if they didn’t think he merited a room to himself, he would just pay for one. And so there I was, on my first day with the Indian team, with a room of my own.

We had an early practice session the following morning, and I bumped into Sachin in the lift. I had interacted with him briefly in England a few months earlier, so he knew who I was, but that was the extent of our relationship. After a cursory ‘Hello’, I kept my mouth shut. He was the Indian captain, how was I supposed to react? Sensing my discomfiture, Sachin immediately put me at ease. He congratulated me on making it to the Test team, asked me to relax and enjoy the game, and not put too much pressure on myself. That helped, for the moment. As I boarded the team bus and made my way towards the back, I almost lost it again. In a daze, I walked past the men whom I had admired and idolised for so long.

The first day at practice was a fairy tale, even though I didn’t get to bat—if you were not playing the game, you never got to bat for even five minutes. But I didn’t mind that at all. Just being a part of the madness and chaos was enough. Till then, I had played cricket in anonymity, with few spectators and little attention. To suddenly be transported to a world where everything seemed available at the snap of one’s fingers was a heady feeling. There was such a buzz everywhere, so much energy.

It was only later that I realised how easy it was to get carried away. You were made to feel like a king, and everyone waited on you. But the seniors didn’t seem to care. They were so absorbed in their cricket, it was great to watch them go through the business without fuss. Everyone knew exactly what to do and while it was a little intimidating, it was also an eye-opener.

Nayan Mongia got a big hundred in that match, as we feasted on an inexperienced Australian attack, which included new spinners Peter McIntyre and Brad Hogg, to clinch a comfortable victory. That first Test as a part of the Indian team was all about watching and learning from the sidelines. Actually, most of my first year went that way. I tried to get to know my teammates, hang out with them, be accepted as part of the group. I asked a lot of questions— including, in hindsight, several silly ones—because all of it was so new to me, and I was extremely curious.

The night before my debut for the Indian team in Ahmedabad, I tried to follow my usual routine after leaving the coach’s room—early dinner, early to bed. But sleep just wouldn’t come. I couldn’t stop thinking about playing the South African attack. I had faced them in Baroda, and it was obvious that they were far superior to anything I had encountered previously. They were quick, threatening, and skilful. I would be less than honest if I said that I didn’t have gremlins of self-doubt, particularly after managing just 4 and 27 in two innings. At the team huddle before play, I received my Test cap from Azzu bhai. It was a proud moment, getting my cap and getting it from someone I had looked up to for so long. Sachin won the toss and we batted, but my first Test innings was memorable for all the wrong reasons. My first scoring stroke in Test cricket was a four off a full toss from Paul Adams, but that was as good as it got. Adams had a very peculiar action, his head almost disappearing into his body at the time of release, and I had never faced a left-arm wrist-spinner before. I simply couldn’t read him. To make matters worse, I held myself responsible for Azzu bhai’s run-out. I had this tendency of taking a couple of steps down the pitch in defence, and I did so after playing Allan Donald towards point. By the time I looked up, Azzu bhai was more than halfway down the track. Before I could shout ‘No’, Jonty Rhodes had swooped down from point and hit the stumps at the non-striker’s end. Azzu bhai was run out for 35. What had I done?

I had barely recovered from the shock when Donald trapped me in front, but there was no time to mope because things were happening rapidly. It was a tricky surface and a wicket was always round the corner. The noise from the packed house was deafening, the adrenaline pumping. Donald took four wickets as we were bowled out for 223, with Sachin’s 42 the highest score. Our spinners, Anil Kumble, Sunil Joshi and Narendra Hirwani, replied in kind but Fanie de Villiers, the paceman, held firm while making an unbeaten 67. His ninth-wicket stand of 60 with Donald took South Africa past our total and by the time Adams, the No. 11, was dismissed, South Africa had posted 244, a lead of 21.

In our second dig, Donald struck with the new ball again and we lost wickets in a clump before Anil joined me. We had struggled to 124 for 7, and our overall lead was just 103. It was a crucial phase of the match, and I felt that I was also playing for my place in the team. Sourav would be back for the next game, so I needed to get some runs for myself. And we were in a pickle, so I had to score for the team.

I had perhaps lost a little bit of focus in the first innings, I told myself. The atmosphere in the stadium, the noise and the energy, had charged me up. The adventure of travelling with the team had impacted me adversely. Before the Australia Test, my father had gifted me a copy of Thus Spake, a book by Swami Vivekananda. The morning of the second innings, I had read a bit from it before going out to bat. It’s the kind of book that inspires you. By the time I put it down and walked out, I was determined to stand up for the team.

Luckily, I also had a wonderful guiding hand in Anil. After each over, he would tell me, ‘You have to fight it out.’ He supported me through a tricky phase, even as I appealed to higher powers for help. I was wearing a chain with Sai Baba’s pendant, and I looked at it before every ball, praying that I would score runs. Between that ritual and Anil’s calming influence, I played the way I had in first-class cricket—keeping the good balls out, capitalising on the loose ones. If it was slightly short, I played the pull or the back-foot punch. If it was full, I drove it crisply. And if I didn’t have to play at a ball, I didn’t. It was an innings of grit more than anything else, with massive help from Anil.

I made my first Test half-century, and our 56-run partnership helped set South Africa a target of 170 in the fourth innings. The consensus was that Anil would bowl us to victory, but Srinath showed that there was more to him than pranking. The ball was really flying, and standing at slip, I was hoping the edges wouldn’t come to me. He was bowling with such fire. The South Africans were blown away by his six-wicket haul and capitulated for 105, and we celebrated long and hard. I had seen victory at close quarters in Delhi but this time, I had done my bit for it—and on my debut.

Amid the din, I remember telling Rahul, ‘Jam, this is what I love, this is what I have always wanted.’ The wise man that he is, Rahul replied, ‘Enjoy it, Lax. This is the good part, but it isn’t as easy as it looks.’ It didn’t take me long to appreciate the import of those words, but at that point, I was on cloud nine. In my hotel room, the phone rang off the hook. Every time it chirped, I told Sanjay, who was my roommate, to answer the call, assuming it must be for him. Until he said, ‘Your first Test, you made a fifty. Everyone is calling to talk to you, you are the hero now.’

Up 1–0 in the three-match series, we were upbeat going to Eden Gardens. Predictably, the reception we got was tumultuous. No one is more invested in cricket than the Kolkatan, and to add to their delight, Sourav was back in the eleven. He had to be slotted into the middle order and I had done enough to keep my place, so there had to be a rejig, which meant Rahul went up to open the batting and Sanjay was left out. I didn’t know how to handle the situation. I was only playing my second Test, and was sharing a room with a senior cricketer who had been dropped. There was understandable sadness in the room. Consequently, I spent a lot of time with Rahul and some of the other guys I’d known for a long time through domestic cricket.

Things didn’t go well on the field either. Gary Kirsten and Andrew Hudson flayed us with a wonderful opening partnership on day one and from there on, everything went downhill. I fell cheaply in our reply and had barely taken off my pads when Azzu bhai was struck on his arm and walked off the ground, retired hurt. That didn’t seem to go down too well with Madan Lal, who felt that he should have stayed on and gutsed it out. Azzu bhai was fuming, not taking kindly to his commitment being questioned by the coach in front of everyone else. When he went back to the middle, he started to smash the bowling around, almost as if trying to hit every ball for four and prove a point. He did make a century and Anil weighed in with another excellent knock, but we were well beaten. From the high of Ahmedabad and a chirpy dressing room, the Eden defeat was a humbling, chastening comedown. The joie de vivre had disappeared, no one looked anyone else in the eye. How things could change, so dramatically and so quickly!

I had my first encounter with the axe when we went to Kanpur for the third Test. Little did I know that it was to be a recurring theme in the first few years of my career. On another tricky surface, we did enough to secure the series. I went on as a substitute and pulled off a very good running catch, and felt that I had played a small role in our success. The thing that stands out for me from that game, though, is a little incident involving Daryll Cullinan. I was sitting just outside the boundary rope when he was dismissed, and as he was walking back, we were clapping for our team. Cullinan broke stride, came towards us and thundered, ‘You guys are coming to Durban soon, we shall see who claps there.’ I was stunned; were we out of order in applauding our teammates?

Cullinan’s ‘come to Durban’ jibe was still fresh in my mind as I scurried to get ready to go to South Africa almost immediately after the Kanpur victory. It was my first overseas tour with the Indian team, and it was to a hostile land where I expected spicy pitches to assist South Africa’s pace-heavy attack. We had two quality quicks in Srinath and Venkatesh Prasad, but the supporting cast were raw and inexperienced. After a four-day game in Port Elizabeth, we went to dreaded Durban for the first Test. Our worst nightmares played themselves out at Kingsmead.

It was a demanding surface, as we had expected—there was express pace, generous bounce and substantial lateral movement. I wasn’t in the playing eleven, but what I saw from the outside blew me away. I witnessed first-hand the quality of cricket Hansie Cronje’s men showcased in that game. It’s one thing watching it on TV, it’s quite another witnessing the action from 80 yards away. I began to ask myself—‘Am I good enough to negotiate Donald, de Villiers, Pollock and McMillan? How will I stand up to them? Will I be badly exposed?’ I wasn’t the only one who was thinking along those lines. Even I, fresh to the setup, could see that the mindset of our team had changed. The dressing room was riddled with doubts and negativity, and we were too busy talking up the opposition and how good they were. We made excuses for what was to come; predictably, we were battered into submission, shot out for 100 in the first innings and an even more humiliating 66 in the second. Just one Test into the three-match series, we were prepared for the worst.

We were cowering in embarrassment after having lost inside three days when Madan Lal decided that instead of returning immediately to the hotel, we would have a net session. I started off bowling medium pace from 18 yards to our batsmen, then was padding up to have a hit when the indoor centre opened and the coach hauled the batsmen who had played the Test across for another stint. I was sitting there all alone, my pads on, bat in hand, wondering what was going on. That’s how it was then. If you were in the eleven, you got to bat at the nets. If you were not playing, then no batting, no preparation.

Sensing my disappointment and frustration, my Hyderabad teammate Venkatapathi Raju appeared by my side with advice that was invaluable. ‘You must look after your own preparation instead of relying only on the coach because you have to be ready to perform when the opportunity comes,’ he told me.

‘But how, Venkat?’

It was easy for the substitutes to lose touch because there weren’t too many net bowlers around then, and when they did turn up, they bowled at the main batsmen because our bowlers needed to rest and recover. Consequently, the opportunity to prepare for a match, to top up one’s batting, was minimal to nil, as I was finding out.

Venkat walked the talk by staying back long after the team had left for the hotel and feeding me throw-downs. To him, it might have been a small thing, but I was suddenly lifted by the selflessness of my teammate. He need not have invested his time in me, but here he was, happy to go the extra mile to help me remain in touch and on my toes. But that was no surprise because that is pretty much how Venkat is, as a cricketer and a person.

Off we went to Cape Town then, for the second Test. It was my first New Year’s Eve in a foreign land, and I roamed the waterfront with the guys, enjoying the spectacle and temporarily forgetting our on-field travails. On 1 January, after practice, we went to Cape Point as a group and bonded as a team. The festivities had cheered us up, and we looked to the new year with renewed hope as the cloud of negativity lifted a bit.

On the morning of the Test match, I walked across to throw balls to the man who was giving catches to the slip cordon. I had batted in the nets the previous day, but that was about it, so I assumed that I wouldn’t be playing this game either. As I loaded my arm to throw the first ball, Anil walked up to me and said, ‘What are you doing? You should be taking catches, not giving them. You are playing this game.’

It wasn’t the best of circumstances to make an overseas debut. But while I was short of mental preparation, I was thrilled to be back in the Test eleven. At lunch on the third day, we met Mr Nelson Mandela, the inspirational South African president, a simple, humble man who never raised his voice in anger and yet oversaw one of the greatest revolutions in the history of mankind. It was the highlight of the tour for me, to be able to shake the hand of a great human being about whom I had heard and read so much.

As if to entertain Mr Mandela, Sachin and Azzu bhai put on an exhibition of batting, the likes of which I had seldom seen. I had disappointingly been strangled down leg off Pollock, but everything was forgotten as our two best batsmen regaled the Newlands audience, with Mr Mandela as its central figure. The ball flew off their bats as if pre-ordained. In the dressing room, we were in a trance. Out in the stands, the fans were going berserk because they knew how privileged they were. In the middle, the South Africans watched open-mouthed, then doffed their hats to the sheer brilliance of the dynamic pair. It was riveting batsmanship for as long as it lasted. Sachin and Azzu bhai both completed extraordinary centuries.

Despite their heroics, we were well behind when our second innings started, and a familiar batting collapse ensued. I was given an early wake-up call when Donald hit me second-ball on my visor with one that climbed sharply from a length. It shook me up and rattled me somewhat, but in a twisted sort of way, it was perhaps just the kind of start I needed. Suddenly, my senses were heightened, my reflexes were sharp, and my focus intense. I gritted it out, putting a huge price on my wicket, hanging in there, determined to not throw it away. We were shot out cheaply but I checked a small box in my personal sheet: I was 35 not out when we were bowled out. I had proved to myself that I could hold my own against that quality of bowling.

Between the second and third Tests, we played a warm-up game in Bloemfontein with Anil as the skipper, and I built on the second-innings knock in Cape Town by spending more time at the crease and boosting my confidence ahead of the final Test in Johannesburg. On a personal note, I was carrying form and confidence to the Wanderers, and couldn’t wait for the first ball to be bowled. We make plans, and then watch helplessly as forces beyond our control step in to wreck them. I had been looking forward to lots of runs on a reasonably docile surface when, on the second morning, Lance Klusener pinged me on my right glove. It was just the fourth ball I had faced, and I didn’t really pay too much attention to the blow. But in the next over, when I couldn’t even grip the bat, I realised that the damage wasn’t miniscule. Ali Irani, our physio, dashed to the middle and eased my hand from the glove, to find that the ring finger had dislocated.

Ali pulled the finger back and I felt excruciating pain even as I heard something snap. That was that. I couldn’t put my glove back on, and I dragged myself off the park, the physical pain insignificant compared to the turmoil in my mind and the ache in my heart. I knew that the tour was over for me, and a visit to the hospital merely confirmed that. The X-ray revealed a fracture, and as I sat there waiting for the doctor to wrap my hand in plaster that would be my companion for three weeks, I watched my good mate Rahul play beautifully to bring up his first Test hundred.

I had been named in the one-day squad as well, but when I returned to the dressing room, it was decided that the three-week lay-off meant I should return home with the Test specialists. My life came to a standstill. I had come to South Africa hoping to make a century, hoping to establish myself in the Test side. I believed that in order to cement my place in the Indian team, I had to make at least one century. It was just my perception—and a wrong one, as I was to find out a few years later—but I was distraught that I would have to leave the country prematurely, without having done what I had set out to do.

It was too much for a 22-year-old, and I broke down in the dressing room. One by one, my teammates consoled me. They had well-meaning, kind words of encouragement, but nothing really registered in my mind. In the haze, I distinctly remember thinking that Sachin hadn’t spoken to me at all. But as the dressing room cleared out and I sat there feeling sorry for myself, Sachin quietly came in and sat next to me. My coffin was open—I was putting my gear back—and on the inside of the lid was a photograph of Sai Baba. Sachin pointed to the picture and asked me if I was a believer. When I nodded yes, he told me philosophically, ‘He will take care of you. He will protect you.’

That re-opened the floodgates, but Sachin wasn’t done talking. ‘You have a bright future,’ he said. ‘A lot of cricketers would have been quietly happy to leave a tour as tough as this one under these circumstances. But you are upset that you have to go home, you are crying that you will not be able to play. That speaks volumes for your character, and that’s what tells me that you will have a very good career. Never ever lose this attitude of yours.’

Those words perked me up. My captain, and the best batsman in the world, had faith in me. As soon as Sachin left the dressing room, I cleaned myself up and decided that I should not sour the atmosphere by sulking. We had worked ourselves into a fairly good position, and the last thing the team needed was negative energy. So I went out and sat with the reserves, egging my friends on. We fell short of driving home the advantage, as a combination of stubborn batting and bad light thwarted our march. But it was my first serious lesson in overseas cricket. When you are playing away from home, you need to seize the important moments. Though we didn’t do that, we did show that we had the potential to beat South Africa in their own backyard. We should have believed that we could, but we hadn’t, from the start of the series.

I returned to Hyderabad, my dreams unfulfilled. I had tried desperately hard to be a part of the team in every sense. I had been overeager and intense, and I took every match as an examination I just could not fail. I had seen my friends Rahul and Sourav establish themselves, being accepted as part of the team, and I had wanted that for myself. It strengthened my belief that unless I made a hundred, I would not be accepted. Everyone might know I had the potential, but acceptance from my teammates was very important. I was convinced that if I didn’t make that breakthrough century, I would be pretty much on my own.

Back home, the finger still in plaster and unable to bat, I felt sad and lonely as I watched the triangular series in South Africa on television. I should have been out there playing. Now, after this setback, would I ever play for India again?

Having had a taste of international cricket, of being a part of the Indian dressing room, I wanted more. But I also started to doubt myself. Had I done enough to earn a recall once I recovered from the injury? Did the people who mattered really think I deserved my place in the team? I remembered Sachin’s words, but I also wondered if he had merely said the right things at what was a difficult time for me. When you fall into the abyss of self-pity, you start looking for the worst, and I was dangerously close to that predicament. I wanted to be in South Africa, not in Abids, Hyderabad.

My father and my uncle did their best to keep me positive. In his own measured, comforting manner, my father slowly uprooted the seeds of selfdoubt. My uncle, more emotional and impulsive, curbed his natural exuberance and patiently explained to me that injuries were part and parcel of sport. He told me that my broken finger was a war wound I should wear with pride. Their enthusiasm was infectious, and it helped me step out of the cocoon of despair I had built around myself.

Although I couldn’t bat, there was nothing to stop me from keeping myself physically fit ahead of the next assignment, a full tour of the Caribbean. I met an orthopaedic doctor who made me do various exercises so that there would be no stiffness when the plaster was removed. I had marvelled at the fitness of the South Africans during my debut series, and was eager to learn what worked for them. I had struck up a friendship with Herschelle Gibbs, and he had introduced me to Paddy Upton, who was then the physical trainer of the South African side. Paddy was happy to share his secrets, and I tried to follow the routine he had suggested for me as I waited for the finger to heal. As the days ticked by, I became more and more desperate to start hitting the ball. That desperation peaked when the team for the West Indies tour was announced and I found myself back in the fray.

But I had been picked as an opener. I, who had never opened before in my life, at any level, against anyone. I would have to face up to Curtly Ambrose and Courtney Walsh, perhaps the most potent new-ball attack in the world at the time. I blanched, not out of fear but from uncertainty. That’s when my father stepped in, not for the first time, with his wisdom. ‘It is your duty to perform any role that the team wants you to,’ he said. That settled it for me. The reason for my elevation to the top of the order was provided by Shivlal Yadav, one of my well-wishers and the South Zone representative in the national selection panel at the time. The middle order was packed—the selectors had named a combined squad for the Tests and ODIs—with Robin Singh also in the mix. The selectors and the team management felt that since I had batted a lot in first-class cricket at No. 3, I had the technique and the mindset required to open the batting. I was reassured by this explanation, but there was one small hurdle still to be overcome.

Or rather, what I thought was a small hurdle.

The team had been named on a Friday, and we were to fly out of Mumbai on the following Tuesday. Madan Lal, our coach, wanted me to undergo a fitness test in New Delhi on Sunday to see for himself that I had recovered fully from the broken finger. I had no fears on this count—I had been batting a lot on a cement pitch with considerable bounce to figure out if there was any jarring, and there had been none. The hand was fine, I was ready to go.

On Saturday, it was time to hit the nets one last time before the fitness test in Delhi. Rajesh Yadav and I were on our way to St John’s on my Kinetic Honda, and were breezing past the Buddha statue on Tank Bund when the unexpected happened: a flat tyre. The bike skidded and all of a sudden, I found myself on the road. Before I could find my bearings, the bike landed on my left knee, damaging my meniscus. The shooting pain was accompanied by heavy swelling, and I saw my Caribbean dream disappear before my eyes.

We got the flat tyre fixed and limped back home. Close to hysteria, I called up my father, and he took me to the orthopaedic doctor at Uday Clinic, next to our apartment block. One look at the X-ray, and the ortho confirmed that clinically, there was a meniscus tear. By then, it was Saturday night, and I was scheduled to fly out for the fitness test the next morning. I was on heavy painkillers and ice packs the whole night, and when my father dropped me off at the airport in the morning, I was still limping noticeably. In a bid to distract me, he joked, ‘Your style of walking now resembles ML Jaisimha’s!’

I was still smiling at my father’s remark when Madan Lal picked me up at the Delhi airport and took me to the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium. I had expected a long batting stint, but I was only asked to bat for five minutes. For the next halfhour, he gave me fielding practice and made me chase balls down, unaware of my accident the previous day. Fortunately for me, the painkiller had kicked in, and any pain I felt, I masked effectively.

I got through the fitness test and returned to Hyderabad that same night, more relieved than elated. My proud father was there to receive me. It was the first time he had seen me endure so much pain and come out the better for it. In a matter of four months, I had made a half-century in my Test debut, fractured my hand, injured my knee, and had yet kept my wits about me. I was now looking forward to playing the quickest bowlers in the world, in the unfamiliar role of an opener, in their own backyard. My father was delighted with the character I had shown in adversity. It pleased him that his son was not relying on short-cuts in his pursuit of success.

‘Irrespective of what happens in the West Indies, for me, you have already achieved what a sportsperson should,’ he told me.

At that moment, that was all I needed to hear.