It is no coincidence that the most prolific catchers in international cricket fielded in the slips for a large part of their careers. Almost every one of them was a specialist batsman. There are the odd exceptions, like Ian Botham and Shane Warne, but non-wicketkeepers with the most catches in Test cricket are Rahul Dravid, Mahela Jayawardene, Jacques Kallis, Ricky Ponting and Mark Waugh. Rahul tops the chart with 210 catches, many of them spectacular. He made catching in the slips look so easy. It wasn’t that he, or the others, didn’t put down any. Catches will be dropped, no matter what. The expert close-in catchers are those that have a success rate in excess of 80 per cent. That comes through practice, through intelligence, smartness and awareness.

One of the reasons for our successes overseas in the 2000s was our improved close-in catching. Rahul and I formed a solid partnership in the slips as well, he mostly at first slip and I at second, when the fast bowlers operated. For the spinners, Rahul stood at slip while I moved to silly point. I have just two Test wickets, and because I rarely bowled, I felt I owed the team a few catches. When I walked away from the game, I had 135 Test catches—no other Indian player, besides Rahul, has taken more catches as a fielder.

As the core of the 2000s took shape, we had a settled slip cordon, which was particularly imperative when travelling overseas. Rahul at first, myself at second, Viru at third and Anil at gully were a constant, unless Sachin fancied a go in the slips, in which case he would field at the first-slip position and Rahul would move to the third.

I stood at second slip for my school team and, as I worked my way up the ranks, for all the sides I represented. I enjoyed being positioned there, a little ahead of first slip, and willed the ball to come to me. One of the basic requirements to be successful in the slip cordon is to want to catch the ball. If you are afraid that it might come to you, you are better off fielding elsewhere. Because I stood at second slip all through my career and developed a familiarity with that position, it helped me identify cues and anticipate better with the passage of time. As a second-slip fielder, I always watched the edge of the bat. The wicketkeeper and the first slip generally tend to follow the path of the ball from the time it leaves the bowler’s hand. As you move wider in the slip cordon, your eyes are on the outside edge of the bat.

I got so accustomed to focusing on the edge that when, in a rare break from norm, I stood at first slip for Lancashire—Stuart Law was the established second-slipper—I veered from the accepted routine and continued to keep my eyes trained on the outside edge. Taking my cue from the edge of the bat gave me the best chance of knowing where the ball could go on contact. It is all about muscle memory. Because I was training day in, day out, and because I had stood at second slip for hours on end, I could make out where the nick would travel, just by watching the way the batsman picked up the bat for a particular stroke. Hashim Amla and Brian Lara were two batsmen who made life very difficult for me in the slips. I could barely get a fix on their outside edge because they both had high back lifts, and their bats came down in an arc from the skies as they got into their strokes. The very quick downswing wasn’t easy to adjust to. My head and eyes needed to be still, but the batsmen’s technique compelled me to almost bob my head because the outside half of the bat kept moving vertically. I tended to react a fraction of a second late when either of them was batting. I needed to be more alert than when I had a much clearer line of sight. With time, I learnt to make subtle adjustments depending on the angle the bowler was delivering from. If a left-arm seamer was bowling from over the stumps to a right-hand batsman, I stood a little wide. For a right-arm paceman bowling over the wicket, I moved closer to the wicketkeeper. When playing in India, I stood a little ahead of where I would overseas, because there is less pace and bounce here compared to Australia or South Africa. But no matter how far back from the stumps I stood, I made sure that a majority of the balls came at a height between my knees and my waist.

The wicketkeeper sets the tone for how far back you stand from the stumps. The rest of the slip cordon automatically falls into place. The first slip is slightly behind the wicketkeeper, the second slip is at least a foot in front of the first, and the third slip is a further foot ahead. This staggered arrangement ensures that nobody’s line of sight is blocked, and that two fielders are in position to go for the same catch.

As important as the distance behind the stumps is the spacing between the slip fielders. Again, it is the wicketkeeper who decides how wide the first slip should stand relative to him. From there on, it is for those in the slips to arrive at distances of comfort and convenience. At school, we were told that the distance between the two slip fielders must be one arm length. When Rahul and I stood next to each other at slips in India, we maintained a six-foot-length distance between his right foot and my left foot when a right-hander was on strike. We extended that to an eight-foot length overseas; it gave us more time to track the ball, and allow for pace and bounce.

While we covered these bases steeped in theory, there could be no compromise on practice, and plenty of it. I fielded at forward short leg at the start of my career, and later at silly point, to the spinners. When Rahul wanted a break, I moved to slip. Anil and Bhajji were both quick, so I stood finer to them compared to Murali Kartik or Pragyan Ojha, left-arm spinners for whom I moved a little wider. You have to make subtle adjustments depending on the angle the bowler was creating. You can’t take anything for granted. It was at the Chennai camp in 2001, before the Australia series, that our slip cordon took concrete shape. Rahul and I took at least 100 catches a day, but not mechanically. We started the session taking catches with the new ball, because it is very important for the hands to get used to the hardness of the ball and the thickness of the seam. If you aren’t accustomed to these factors, there is every chance that the ball will bounce off your palms.

We also practised with the brand of ball to be used for a particular series. In India, it was the SG Test ball. In Australia, it was the Kookaburra, which had a pronounced seam when new, but flattened out quickly. In England, it was first the Reader and then the Duke ball. Ahead of each series, we practised with that specific ball to make sure that when it was game-time, we weren’t found wanting in preparation.

As we became more and more experienced, Rahul and I started wearing gym gloves while training to protect our palms. By then, we had taken enough catches for the gloves to not take away the feel for the ball. The practice sessions in the later stages of our careers were designed to keep our reactions sharp. If you prepare thoroughly and keep the standards at training high, then the catches become a lot easier in the matches. Rahul and I challenged ourselves. Sometimes, slip practice can become monotonous because there are not too many variations. So we either stood very close to the guy giving catches, or extended the width between us, trying to make things as difficult as possible during our practice sessions.

It was Bobby Simpson who transformed Rahul and me from decent slip catchers to very good ones, and piqued our interest with his emphasis on technique. I had marvelled at Azzu bhai’s unbelievable hands and judgement at slip, and  was convinced that it was a gift from above, even though I had seen first-hand how much time he spent honing his catching skills. Simpson joined us on our tour of New Zealand in late 1998 as the batting consultant. The former Australian captain had been a brilliant catcher during his playing days. He was a master communicator, but he could also show us what he was talking about. He introduced us to the Australian technique of slip catching, where the weight is on the inside of each foot, near the arch. Because the knees are almost collapsing inwards, the insides of the knees are closer. This allows the body to move in either direction unhindered.

He also showed us the ideal position to ‘receive’ the ball: adjacent to the body, the upper body pivoting on contact between the palms and the ball. There was ‘give’ because we could flex our elbows. The more flexed the elbows, the softer the palms. Hard palms are a certain recipe for the ball to pop out, especially if it comes at pace.

Simpson saw potential in Rahul and me. He made our catching sessions particularly arduous, putting us through a succession of difficult nicks. He challenged us to take 10 catches in a row, which sounds easy but was far from it because he was adept at giving catches, not one of them straightforward. It was a great experience for the two of us because until then, while we had taken plenty of catches every day while training, we had not been aware of the technique that would give us the best chance of holding on to those catches. By the end of the New Zealand tour, we were comfortably taking 10 catches in a row. Sachin also helped hone our catching skills. His preferred weapon of choice was a stump, which made anticipation difficult because you couldn’t predict in which direction the ball would fly. You had to be focused every fraction of every second, a routine that heightened our powers of concentration. Slip catching in particular is as much about your mind as it is about motivation, practice and technique. You might have fielded for 89 overs on a hot, fruitless day with not a ball coming towards you, but that’s no excuse if you get a chance in the final over and shell it because you weren’t mentally sharp. If you are switched off or drained from having been too switched on, there is every chance that you will drop that catch.

That doesn’t mean you must be switched on all the time, because to be on high alert constantly for six hours is humanly impossible. One of the main reasons why most successful slip fielders are batsmen is that they adopt similar concentration-relaxation mechanisms. 

As a batsman, you can’t afford to keep your eye on the ball at all times. It’s just not possible to sustain levels of intensity for long periods if your mind is obsessed with tracking the path of the ball every second. You must switch off between balls so that you can keep yourself fresh. When batting, I would switch off the moment the ball became ‘dead’, not thinking about what had happened or what was likely to happen, just keeping my mind blank and free of apprehension. A fast bowler takes between 15 and 20 seconds to walk back to the top of his bowling mark. That’s the time I used to let my concentration drop so that I had enough in reserve for the next ball. Once the bowler started to run in, I shut everything else out. With time, I learnt to concentrate the hardest as he loaded in his action, because you need peak concentration for no more than a second or two. That’s exactly what slip catching demands, too. If you don’t time that peak concentration properly, you will commit a mental error, that’s for sure. Between balls, Rahul and I discussed a lot of different things, none of them related to cricket. It was our private routine so that we could keep ourselves and each other alert. Fortunately, we were on the same wavelength and could talk about our families, our kids, the schools they went to, the books we were reading. But as the bowler turned at the top of his run-up, the world around us would cease to exist.

One of the many keys to catching is to stay low for as long as possible. I would be upright when the bowler started his run-up, and it wasn’t until he was three or four yards away from the bowling crease that I’d flex my knees and go down. The longer the knee is weighted, the quicker the weight goes to the heels. Once you are on your heels, balance and movement are adversely affected. I learnt that by timing the flexing of the knees, I could give myself the maximum time to keep my weight on the balls of my feet.

It is vitally important to get used to the background against which you are viewing the ball. There are grounds where the ball is camouflaged against the backdrop, making it virtually impossible to collect it till the last second. I tried to counter this on practice day by standing where I would at second slip and familiarising myself with the background. I found the Gabba, Eden Gardens and the PCA Stadium in Mohali the most demanding grounds for a slip catcher. It was very easy to lose sight of the ball if your mind wavered for the tiniest fraction of a second. At these venues, I consciously willed myself to concentrate that much harder.

I learnt the hard way that how you react when you drop a catch is as significant as when you hold one. I knew that for all the practice and concentration, for all the want and hunger, it is impossible to hold on to every single catch. If you beat yourself up about a dropped catch, like I used to early in my career, it is guaranteed that you will not be ready for the next chance that comes your way because your mind is already preoccupied.

No one goes in wanting to drop a catch, and every member of the team knows that. While there is intense disappointment, and even recriminations, when a chance is put down, it evaporates as quickly. I worked hard to put a dropped catch behind me and prepared for the next one that might come. The last thing you want to do is to compromise on what might happen because of what has happened. The more you mope, the more you are setting yourself up for another spill.

The catch that gave me the most satisfaction came in the Mumbai Test against South Africa in March 2000. Lance Klusener was rallying South Africa from a difficult position when he slashed at Srinath. As the ball flew off the outside edge, my reflexes took over. I dived full length to my right, snaffling the ball with my right hand in front of Rahul at first slip while still airborne. I had watched the ball from the time it caught the outside edge to the moment it nestled in my hand. I had already taken two catches in that innings at silly point off Anil’s bowling, but this one remains my all-time favourite.

I enjoyed making runs, and I took pride in instilling confidence in the lower-order batsmen and helping them realise their potential. But nothing gave me greater joy than hanging on to a catch and ensuring that the hard work of the bowler did not go in vain. The lot of the bowler is a thankless one. On flat tracks, he runs in without complaint, plugging away over after over with the harsh sun beating down. When he does eventually create a chance, you have to make it count. I was happiest on a cricket field when I put a smile on the face of the bowler. So long as he was my teammate!