Christchurch, 30 December 2002. The shrill insistence of my cell phone broke the midnight silence that hung heavy in my hotel room. I looked at the instrument with equal parts hope and trepidation. This was the moment of reckoning.

We had arrived that afternoon after another humbling defeat on what had become a nightmare tour of New Zealand. Beaten out of sight on damp, green tracks in the Tests and humbled in the first two ODIs, the tour was hurtling from one disaster to another. It was no consolation that like me, most other batsmen too had failed miserably. None of them was on trial like I believed I was. And I was quite sure the trial hadn’t gone well.

I eyed the phone suspiciously, and saw that it was my uncle calling from Hyderabad. Was he calling to congratulate me? Or. . .

‘Bad luck,’ he said. ‘I thought you would be there.’

‘What. . . what are you talking about, Baba mama?’

‘Oh! You don’t know?’ He sounded incredulous.

‘Don’t know what?’

But I didn’t need him to tell me. The 15 had been announced for the World Cup in South Africa two months away, and I wasn’t a part of the squad. I let the phone slide from my hands, not in the mood for a conversation even with my concerned, well-meaning uncle.

30 December had just given way to 31 December and the hope that every new year brings should have invigorated me. Instead, I was at once numb with disbelief and shaking with anger. It had happened again.

I went into shutdown mode. I tried to reason with myself—the decision had been made, and I could do nothing about it. But this was no time for logic. The small voice of reason was drowned out by the raging turmoil, and I tossed and turned restlessly for the rest of the night. The tranquillity of sleep was elusive as despondency grabbed me in its familiar, hurtful embrace.

Just a few hours ago, I had been out at dinner with some of my teammates, among them our captain. Sourav had been unremarkably normal as we discussed matters cricket and otherwise, then left to video-conference alongside John Wright with the national selectors back in India to pick the World Cup 15. He never hinted that my place was in jeopardy, and even though I had learnt to take nothing for granted, I had interpreted that as a positive signal. Communication wasn’t the strongest suit in Indian cricket in that era.

Having spent a sleepless night trying to digest the end of my World Cup aspirations, I remained closeted in my room the following morning, skipping breakfast. I was in no mood to interact with anyone. I thought I had done enough to merit a place in the World Cup squad, but clearly, the men making the decisions didn’t think so. That was fine, but I deserved an explanation. I deserved to be told why I hadn’t been picked. My captain and my coach were in the same hotel, a few hundred yards away. Yet, the first I came to know of my axing was through a phone call from my uncle, several thousand miles away. I would have laughed at the irony had I not been so upset.

We had an afternoon practice session at the AMI Stadium, and much as I would have liked to skip it, I dragged myself out of my room and to the team bus. Several of the players had already boarded it, but I deliberately avoided their gaze. With headphones and sunglasses as my loyal companions, I plonked myself on a seat. No one sat next to me during the drive to the ground. It was only after we had settled into our dressing room that John came up to me and asked me to come to a quiet corner. Without looking me in the eye, he mumbled, ‘You have not been picked for the World Cup.’ ‘I know, John,’ I replied, my glasses hiding my emotions.

My teammates weren’t sure how to react. Neither Sourav, the captain, nor Rahul, his deputy, felt the need to have a chat with me, and the rest kept a safe distance. I knew they wanted to console me, but they also realised that it might not be the best time. I had practically blanked everyone out. A million thoughts were running through my mind, not one of them pleasant. I desperately didn’t want to practise that day. But I did, because that was what had been drilled into me—team before self. My heart was not in it, but I realised that it mattered to no one but me.

I requested John to leave me out of the playing eleven the following day. But Dinesh Mongia, the man who had replaced me in the squad for the World Cup, wouldn’t be arriving in New Zealand until just before the fourth match, so I had no option but to chin up and face the home bowlers on New Year’s Day of 2003. Unsurprisingly, it hardly went well. I was out for 10, we were shot out for 108, and New Zealand won by five wickets. I had to look up those numbers because I have very little recollection of that day.

When I look back, I can see that my ODI career for India was a roller coaster of several lows and occasional highs. I made my debut in April 1998 but it took me three years to crack the 50-over code. Between 1998 and March 2001, I played 13 ODI matches and averaged a miserable 7.81. I wasn’t a one-day natural. I was too keen to score quickly, and in my first half-dozen games, I batted at No. 5 and 6, when the field was spread out and boundary-hitting wasn’t easy. I was more a timer of the ball than a muscler. The big shots weren’t my strength, and the harder I tried to hit the ball, the more I struggled. I was at my most effective and enterprising when the field restrictions were in place because I could find the gaps and deal in boundaries. I wasn’t a great strike rotator to start with, and all of that combined to hold me back in the one-day arena.

It didn’t help either that there was a big crowd at the top of the order, which was where I slotted in naturally. Viru, Sachin and Sourav were all specialist 50-over openers, so even the No. 3 slot was sealed in large part. It was only in 2001, after the Test series against Australia, that I batted consistently at No. 3. Whenever I got a longish run, I had the scores to back me up, but I was always only a couple of failures away from the axe. Despite that, I had averaged 34.64 in my last 73 ODIs, which for a guy who allegedly couldn’t run quickly between the wickets wasn’t too shabby.

I would be the first to acknowledge that I wasn’t the fastest man on the park, or the most naturally athletic. I was what I consider a ‘safe’ fielder rather than an electric one. I held most catches that came my way, I didn’t allow too many balls to go past me in the infield, but I couldn’t hunt down balls like some of my other teammates could.

I also agree that I wasn’t the quickest between the wickets. My body structure and various knee and back injuries played their part, but those are not excuses, merely an acceptance of the reality. If someone had told me, ‘Look Laxman, we understand you want to play ODI cricket but these are the reasons why you won’t be considered,’ I would have been fine with it. I may not have concurred with their assessment, but at least I would have known their line of thinking and perhaps ditched my one-day aspirations altogether. But different captains, coaches and selection panels kept picking me and dropping me for no apparent reason, and I found that hard to comprehend.

Post the Test series in 2001, I had a good run in the one-dayers against Australia. Carrying my Test form into the 50-over format, I scored rapidly. Knocks of 45, 51, 83 and 11 suggested consistency, but also showed that I wasn’t making the most of my touch by the time we reached Goa for the decider with the series all square at 2–2.

We were playing at the Jawaharlal Nehru Nehru Stadium in Margao, which was essentially a football ground. The pitch was slow, the outfield heavy, and there was no value for shots once the field restrictions were off after the  first 15 overs. Australia’s semi-regular spinners, Andrew Symonds and Darren Lehmann, thrived while Shane Warne went for plenty, but after receiving tap in the Power Play overs, Glenn McGrath, Nathan Bracken and Ian Harvey with his cutters and slower ones bounced back strongly.

Because the outfield slowed down the progress of the ball towards the boundary, a lot of running between the wickets was required. It was the first week of April, summer was not far away, and the heat and humidity were oppressive. It was a challenge to my endurance and fitness. We had played three Test matches and four ODIs in a month and a half, all very intense and draining. The last match of the season had placed the most severe demands on my body and mind, and it was satisfying to answer that test with my first ODI hundred. I had big stands with Sourav and Rahul as I set about beating the heat with the strength of my mind.

I dragged myself to the dressing room after being dismissed by Harvey in the 44th over, and Andrew Leipus sprung into action. Disregarding my protestations, the physio made me lie on big blocks of ice because my body temperature had soared during the three hours in the middle and I was teetering dangerously on the verge of a heatstroke. The ice blocks did the trick and I went out to field as we tried to defend 265 for 6, perhaps a few light because we hadn’t kicked on in the final few overs. We seemed in control when we had Australia at 202 for 6, but the irrepressible Michael Bevan—who had by then mastered the art of finishing chases—steered his team home with two overs to spare.

The other striking memory from that time is of the chaos in Goa before and during the game. My old pal Parth Satwalekar drove down to Goa along with his principal and a couple of classmates from his dental college in Dharwad. We had an emotional reunion over dinner the night before the match, and I organised tickets for Parth and his group. When I caught up with him after the game, I was stunned to learn that they hadn’t been allowed entry into the ground. Apparently, fake tickets abounded and the same seats had been sold to two or three different people. As if it wasn’t bad enough that they couldn’t enter the ground, the men from Dharwad had only narrowly escaped a police lathi charge.

The day after the series was decided, the Indian and Australian teams flew from Goa to Mumbai on the same chartered flight. It was a lovely few hours— from the Goa airport to the time we went our separate ways on arrival in Mumbai, Rahul and I were commandeered by Gilchrist, Hayden, Symonds and Harvey. We discussed the tour and primarily the gripping Test series, which had swung one way and then the other before we clinched it 2–1. After the unyielding battles on the field, it was nice to part as friends. The Aussie men were fascinated by the script that had played out during the Test matches, and delighted at having been a part of history. They couldn’t talk enough about the frenzied following for cricket they had been exposed to in the preceding six weeks. That tour opened their eyes to cricket in India, and they were to return again and again, magnetically pulled by the myriad charms of our country. After a tri-series in Zimbabwe, we went to Sri Lanka in July 2001 for another triangular series with New Zealand as the third team. We began the tournament poorly, losing our first three games; I had tapered off after making 60 in the first match against the Kiwis.

For our fourth league match, against Sri Lanka, we were without Sourav, who had been banned for one ODI by match referee Cammie Smith for dissent. We had a strenuous training session at the R Premadasa Stadium with lots of fielding drills. As I dived to stop the ball, I landed heavily on my right knee. I didn’t need the shooting stabs of pain to tell me that it was a bad injury, but just how bad it was became apparent after a few minutes.

As the pain escalated, the knee swelled like a balloon. I was in severe discomfort, and Andrew rushed me for an MRI. He was good friends with Alex Kountouris, the Sri Lankan team physio, who referred him to Dr David Young, a Melbourne-based specialist who was a consultant to the Sri Lankan cricket board, and fortuitously in Colombo at the time. Dr Young had one look at the MRI and told us that I had chondromalacia in the right knee. That’s every bit  as grave as it sounds—a serious tear in the cartilage under the right knee cap. He advised immediate corrective surgery.

Sachin was already out of the tournament following a sesamoid bone injury in Zimbabwe. Because Sourav was serving out a suspension, because we had lost our opening three matches and because we were in danger of being eliminated, the think tank requested me to play through the pain. I wasn’t sure I could stand the rigours of 100 overs, but as always, a chat with my father put things in perspective. ‘Think of the soldiers who fight for the country despite injury. This is nothing compared to that,’ he said. I couldn’t argue with that logic. Dr Young wanted to perform a procedure to drain out some of the fluid, but I shot him down. The extreme pain travelled from the left to the right side of the knee at short intervals, sending shock waves through my body. In the end, the good doctor convinced me to agree to a painkilling injection.

Our bowlers were brilliant in bowling out a strong Sri Lankan side for 183, and I went out to play the third ball of the innings after Amay Khurasiya was bowled by Chaminda Vaas. Viru and I put on 66 for the second wicket, after which I was joined by Rahul, the captain in Sourav’s absence. There was no scoreboard pressure and so we took our time. By the time Rahul was dismissed, we needed just 33 runs in 13 overs, and got home easily. I was unbeaten on 87 as we registered our first win. That result sparked our late charge to the final, which we lost to Sri Lanka, and my 37 was the highest score for India in a disappointing batting effort.

I left Colombo on 5 August, the day after the final, for Sydney and the surgery that was now inevitable. When they opened up my knee, they found substantial cartilage damage and had to scrape from behind the knee cap to fix the problem. The surgeon admonished me for having played through the injury, adding forcefully that I had aggravated it by ignoring medical advice. Post surgery, I stayed on in Sydney to begin my rehabilitation with the New South Wales team. Patrick Farhart, later the physio of the Indian side, was the New South Wales physio at the time. I had already been ruled out of the Test series in Sri Lanka, and was certain to miss the early stages of the tri-series in South Africa in October where we were to play the hosts and Kenya. I wanted to join the Indian one-day team during the later stages of that competition. In my desperation to prove my fitness to the national selectors, I cut my rehab short and returned to India. Patrick was insistent that I stay on for two more weeks and complete the process, but I ignored his advice and flew back to India to play in the Irani Cup against Baroda. This was to have permanent ramifications.

By cutting my rehab short, I had compromised on the strengthening of the supporting muscles in my knee. As a consequence, when I ran, I did so with a limp. That became a muscle memory; because running with a limp had become second nature, it remained my style of running for the rest of my career even when I didn’t experience any pain. It gave the impression for the remaining 11 years that I always had a knee injury.

The moment I proved my fitness with a match-winning century for Rest of India against Baroda in the Irani Cup, I was rushed to South Africa for the last two matches of the tri-series, where I made 15 and 5, followed by 20s in two of my three appearances at home against England. Then came Zimbabwe; after half-centuries in the first two matches, I finished the series with 20, 13 and 16 (again run out), and was relegated to the bench when we toured the Caribbean in the middle of 2002.

After the arrival of Adrian le Roux as our fitness trainer in 2002, I worked specifically on increasing my speed across the turf and between the wickets. I would never become an Usain Bolt, but I spared no effort in getting fitter and faster. Both Adrian and John were happy with the progress I made. I felt I had cracked the one-day batting puzzle which, coupled with my fitness and dietary changes, made me an asset to the 50-over side.

I was included in the one-day squad, though, not surprisingly, I only played one match—in Port of Spain, in June 2002, when we were bowled out in 25 overs. My next outing was a 32-over rain-hit game in England a month later, my only appearance in our dream run to the NatWest title from which Yuvraj Singh and Mohammad Kaif emerged as the stars of the future. I wondered why I had been picked for a 32-over match if I hadn’t been good enough for 50-over cricket. But personal disappointment disappeared as our young superstars chased down 325 in the final against England. I knew that we were seeing the beginning of something spectacular. Yuvraj was a star in the making and he would live up to that billing in time to come. He was exciting and intrepid, powerful and aggressive, a brilliant fielder and a more than handy bowler. He was probably our first new-age, all-round limited-overs player, a free spirit who could change the course of a match in a matter of minutes.

As had become a pattern by then, I played only two games during our Champions Trophy campaign in Colombo in September and saw my World Cup dreams fade into the distance. I was aware by then that I wasn’t the first choice in the minds of several key decision-makers and was reconciled to missing out on the World Cup until the West Indies series at home in November 2002 reignited my hopes.

I started the seven-match ODI series at No. 4, and worked my way up to No. 3 after knocks of 47 and 99. I followed these up with two more halfcenturies and ended the series with 312 runs, the most by an Indian, at an average of 52. I had scored briskly, I was the fittest I had been since I started playing cricket, and I was also bowling off-spin regularly at nets so that I could provide an additional bowling option if Sourav so desired. In a matter of one month, from being on the fringes, I had become a front-runner for the World Cup selection.

Except that things don’t always go the way you want them to. All it took to go from almost automatic to unwanted were knocks of 9 and 20 in New Zealand, where everyone else failed too. During the Napier game where we were batting first, Viru came up to me and said, ‘Better get a fifty today.’ He had sensed, or perhaps knew, that my place was on the line. I appreciated his advice, but I had never played for selection and I wasn’t going to start now. I was dismissed for 20 trying to up the rate of scoring and, sure enough, the clanger fell the next day.

My contention was that if Dinesh Mongia was going to be playing the World Cup, then why wasn’t he originally in the one-day squad in New Zealand? It would have helped him and the team if he had a long run and some confidence behind him going into the big tournament. Once Dinesh landed in New Zealand,  I begged the team management to let me return home. I was not needed anymore; I didn’t get to bat in the nets, I was merely going through the motions. My head was not screwed on right. I didn’t want to be in New Zealand, I didn’t want to be in the dressing room. But I was told that was not an option, that I had to stay on till the bitter end.

Rahul told me in Queenstown, the venue of the fourth ODI, that if I had any questions about my omission, I could ask him. But what was there to ask? John was desperate to have a chat, but I wasn’t interested. Every time he tried to corner me, I found a way to get away from him. I didn’t want to lash out at him because he was a wonderful guy, a terrific coach and a trusted friend. But I knew that if we did sit down for a talk, there was no way I was not going to have a go at him.

John was clearly disturbed and desperate to get through to me. I wouldn’t budge, so on the final day of the tour in Auckland, he grabbed me by my wrist and dragged me to his room.

As soon as he shut the door, John’s emotions got the better of him. ‘I am very sorry about this, Lax,’ he told me, still holding on to me. ‘Right or wrong, I was also party to this decision.’

I didn’t say a word. I gently prised his hand away from my arm and quietly left the room. John had been a key part of my journey towards becoming a better limited-overs player, towards becoming a better player, period. Before the home series against Australia in 2001, he had guaranteed me ten Tests on the trot, telling me not to allow insecurity to come in the way of expressing myself. He had encouraged me at every step, he had approved of the progress I had been making, he had seen first-hand the effort I had put in to improve my white-ball skills.

So when he told me that he too had supported the decision to leave me out —or bring Dinesh in, whichever way you put it—I felt terribly let down. If he thought that for all my hard work, I still wasn’t good enough, he could have told me directly. The relationship between a coach and a player has to be one of complete, total trust. I was encouraged when he told me that I was doing the right things and that he was happy with my development. To hear him say that he hadn’t fought for my inclusion broke my heart.

After that one-sided conversation in John’s room, our relationship was not the same for the remainder of his tenure.

I plunged into Ranji cricket on my return to Hyderabad but made a duck on my first innings back, a sign of things to come. India A were to tour West Indies to play in their domestic first-class competition and, in a cruel twist of fate, I was named skipper of the side. I was hoping to be on the flight to South Africa to play the World Cup. Instead, I was being banished to the Caribbean. I had made up my mind to pull out when my father stepped in, like he only did when I was severely conflicted. His advice was simple. ‘If this is how the selectors think you should serve the country, then go. Don’t let your team or your teammates down.’ More out of respect for him than anything else, I reluctantly travelled to the Caribbean, but I was in no state to turn it on. I made a pair in the first game against Barbados, got another nought against Trinidad & Tobago, and had just one half-century and six single-digit scores in those five matches. It was the worst cricket tour of my life. The only solace was that the boys were doing brilliantly in South Africa, scything their way through the World Cup draw. I took great pride in our stirring run to the final and while I would have loved to be a part of the journey, I was very happy for my friends and teammates. The title was to prove elusive but we had mounted a strong campaign. I couldn’t let my own troubled state cloud the wonderful performances by our side. Within a month of the World Cup final, the Indian team was travelling to Bangladesh for a three-nation tournament. Brijesh Patel had taken over as the chairman of the selection panel ahead of the home series against West Indies the previous year, and he called to check my availability for the tri-series. I flatly told him not to consider me for selection.

I was done with cricket. I was going to call it a day before the next season started. I didn’t think I could ever come to terms with the manner in which I had been left out of the World Cup squad.

An instant calmness cloaked me once I had come to this massive decision. I didn’t think I was being impulsive. I had had five months to ruminate on my career, and I didn’t take the call lightly. I didn’t communicate my choice to either my parents or my uncle, because I didn’t want them to be constantly in my ear. Instead, I decided to go away to the US, to catch up with old buddies whose interest in cricket was only as fans and well-wishers. It was time to unwind and get the angst out of my system, then return home and tell the world.

The first fortnight of the vacation went swimmingly. Reminiscing about school and the great times we had shared took my focus away from the recent developments but gradually, I began to feel a certain emptiness. It took me a couple of days to figure out what it was. I was already missing the daily routine of waking up early, hitting the nets, of feeling ball on bat, of working out in the gym, of ribbing and pranking in the dressing room. Relieved that I hadn’t made an ass of myself by making my intention to retire public, I told myself, ‘Not impulsive, eh, Laxman?’

Energised after time away from the game and with my hunger stoked, I returned to India and got back into the cricketing groove. The 2003–04 domestic season started with the Irani Cup game against Mumbai, a marquee contest that the country’s top players used as a build-up to the Test series against New Zealand. I had a poor first innings, scratching around for an hour and a half and facing 53 deliveries in the Chennai heat to make just five. I also put Sachin down and saw him pile on the runs. For all my resolve to put the past behind, the gremlins had started to germinate when my uncle called me from Hyderabad. ‘Did I bat as poorly as I think I did?’

‘No, it was much worse than that. You don’t have to prove anything to anyone. Remember, it’s vital to have fun. What’s the point otherwise?’ Those four crisp sentences woke me up. I wasn’t going to potter around or look to score points. I appealed to the free spirit within me, and it responded in the second knock when we were set 340 for victory. I joined Rahul at 123 for 3, and we went on to dominate a strong Mumbai attack that included Zak, Ajit Agarkar, Ramesh Powar and Sairaj Bahutule. We put on 168, and with victory all but secured, I was dismissed for 99, a fluent knock that came off just 125 deliveries with 14 fours and a six. It was just the impetus I needed at the start of the season, and that confidence drove me to a man-of-the-series performance against New Zealand, though both Tests ended in draws.

In a tall-scoring first game on a batting beauty in Ahmedabad where toporder batsmen from both teams helped themselves to big runs, I weighed in with 64 and 44. The crucial runs, however, came in Mohali in the second Test after New Zealand amassed 630 for 6 declared. Viru made a controlled 130 and I batted more than seven hours to remain unbeaten on 104, but we lost our last six wickets for 60 runs and were forced to follow-on. Daryl Tuffey rocked us in the second innings by dismissing Viru, Rahul and Sachin inside 13 overs. At 18 for 3 and with loads of time left, we faced a fight and I put my head down in Aakash Chopra’s company and focused primarily on survival. Aakash and I added 110 but, more importantly, played out 280 deliveries. When the teams shook hands on the draw, I had batted for 204 minutes and negotiated 183 balls in making 67 not out. I finished the series with 279 runs at an average of 139.50. Probably because of the volume of runs, I was swiftly brought back for the triangular series that followed, with Australia as the third cog. My game plan was simple—bat with freedom and positive energy, and not focus on the scoreboard or matters like selection that weren’t in my control. The runs came, including a century on Deepavali night in Gwalior, against Australia, when Sachin and I matched each other stroke for stroke. With locusts flying, a full house blaring and a festive air pervading, I felt an exhilarating high. It was to be the start of the best phase of my ODI career, lending weight to my belief that whenever I got a long run, I seldom disappointed. The series ended on a bad note, though, as I put down three catches in the final in Kolkata and Australia won by 37 runs.

The highlight of my ODI career was a one-week phase in January 2004 in the tri-series in Australia. We had drawn the Test series 1–1, I had gorged myself on runs and was hitting the ball beautifully. Between 18 and 24 January, I struck three hundreds in four matches—two against the Aussies, one against Zimbabwe. These were not runs made in anger, they were not runs that had ‘take this’ written all over them. I have always loved playing in Australia, on excellent surfaces, in front of appreciative audiences. The value for shots encouraged me to keep playing them, and the rewards followed immediately and plentifully. By now, I had changed the number on the back of my shirt from 19 to 22. I had picked 19 because one was my lucky number; 1+9 equalled 10. I switched to 22 because it was the birth date of Sailaja, whom I was soon to marry.

I made 16 in the first match against Australia in Melbourne, which we lost by 18 runs, and followed it up with an unbeaten 13 against Zimbabwe in Hobart during a straightforward chase. We had needed a little over 50 to win in 22 overs when I walked in at No. 4; I had told myself that I must carry my wonderful form from the Test series to the ODIs, so I would be better off playing out a few balls quietly and spending time in the middle without any pressure. The following morning, with my music for company, I went on an hourlong jog around beautiful Hobart. From my early days, these jogs had cleared my mind and strengthened my resolve, and it was no different this time around. I found an inner peace, and a reassuring message—good times weren’t far away. As I entered the hotel lobby, I was buoyant.

We reached Brisbane, only for Viru to pick up an injury at nets a day before our third match. Sourav told me that I would open the batting with Sachin, but I wasn’t sure it was the best idea.

I had my customary hit at nets before the match and, on my way back, bumped into Sourav. ‘Dada, Sachin–Sourav is the most feared opening combination in ODI cricket. I don’t think you are sending the right message by batting at No. 4. You should open with Sachin.’

Sourav recognised the logic of this. He opened with Sachin and I was slotted in at No. 3. The skipper was dismissed early, but Sachin put on an exhibition. He tore into the Australian bowling and I sailed along unnoticed until, in his 80s, Sachin felt a pain in his foot like he had in Zimbabwe in 2001. Standing at the non-striker’s end, I feared the worst as I heard a ‘snap’ in his left foot. Physical discomfort got the better of him, and he was dismissed for 86. I tried to put that out of my mind. I was timing the ball well and, energised by the Hobart jog, I didn’t look at the scoreboard. I wanted to be as proactive and positive as possible, and the runs came easily as we came to the final over of the innings, my hundred a couple of hits away.

My partner at the time was Rohan Gavaskar, who was making his debut. Rohan was a bundle of nerves going into the last over because he felt the pressure to bring me back on strike. He did so successfully and when Ian Harvey ran in for the last ball, I needed one run for my first ODI century in Australia. Even though I knew I was on 99, I wasn’t desperate. I was determined to meet the challenge thrown at the start of the series by John Wright. The coach had urged the set batsman to play through till the end of the innings. Others could bat around him, those coming in could play their strokes, and the batsman who had got his eye in could anchor the innings. ‘Can you guys do it?’ John had asked, mock-taunting.

It was for that same meeting that John had invited Dean Jones, a wonderful one-day batsman, to talk about the nuances of run-making in limited-overs cricket. Deano was a brilliant Test batsman too—he braved dehydration and bouts of nausea to make a double hundred in the tied Test in Chennai in 1986— but it was his energy and nous in the one-day format that was truly captivating. Deano enlightened us on the angles we could exploit while batting, how to pace an innings, how hitting down the ground was the easiest and safest option. It was a masterclass, a priceless education. Until then, for all my occasional successes, I hadn’t found a method of getting runs in ODIs. Deano’s message helped me work out a formula to score runs and hundreds in the 50-over format. Harvey sauntered in and fortunately bowled a full toss, which I swung over mid-wicket for four. Rohan was as relieved as I was delighted. My joy stemmed from having achieved the batting goal—as the set batsman, I had stayed on till the end. Additionally, I had made a hundred against Australia, on the pacy Gabba strip. I enjoyed the way I had paced my innings and rotated strike. I had done a lot of hard running, with just eight fours in my 103.

Despite Hayden’s 109, we cruised home by 19 runs with Balaji taking four wickets and Rohan pulling off a sensational catch, diving to his right on his follow through, to account for Symonds.

We stayed on in Brisbane for the next match where I only made 12, but Rahul and Yuvi with the bat, and Sourav with the ball, made sure we kept our winning streak going as Zimbabwe were beaten by 24 runs. By the time we reached Sydney to take on Australia, it was clear that Viru and Sachin wouldn’t be available for some time. That meant Sourav, Rahul or I had to bat through the innings. I put my hand up, and was rewarded with one of the most sensational ODI innings I have been witness to. Yuvi was in tremendous touch. Standing at the non-striker’s end, I loved the cracking sound his bat made as it connected with the ball. I distinctly remember a flat-batted straight six off Harvey that smacked into the sightscreen and rebounded halfway back to the bowler. It was a gob-smacking exhibition of power and timing. Our hundreds were both in vain, however, as the Duckworth-Lewis Method bailed Australia out after we had posted 296 for 4. They chased down the revised target of 225 in a thrilling finish.

The circus now pitched tent in Adelaide and we were rudely jolted after Sourav decided to bat. In 22 deliveries, Heath Streak and Andy Blignaut destroyed the top order. Openers Sanjay Bangar and Parthiv Patel both went for nought, and when Sourav was dismissed in the fourth over for one, we were reeling at four for three. Rahul and I counterpunched without taking any risks. The ball flew off my bat as I played aggressively. It was important for us to regain momentum after the previous defeat to Australia, and despite the gravity of the situation, Rahul and I, and then Rohan with his maiden half-century, lifted us to 280 for 7. For the third time in a week, I walked back with a hundred to my name—this one, 131 in 138 balls with 13 fours and a six, was as crucial as any before. Zimbabwe gave us a real fright after we made early inroads, with Stuart Carlisle and Sean Ervine slamming hundreds and nearly taking them over the line. I took a brilliant catch, diving to my left in the slips to dismiss Friend, grabbing the ball with my left hand inches off the ground. Then, with Blignaut threatening to take the game away from us in the last over, I charged in from deep mid-wicket and flung myself forward to hold on to a second good catch. The guys came charging in from all parts of the park as I grinned broadly. I hadn’t been as happy after any of the three hundreds. The catch was a game changer and we squeaked home by three runs.

I couldn’t sustain my batting form, though I did take four catches in our next outing against Zimbabwe. We approached the best-of-three finals against Australia with confidence, with Viru and Sachin back in the eleven, but were swept aside—by seven wickets and 208 runs. Our run of losses towards the end took some gloss off an otherwise successful tour.

I rounded off an ultra-productive six months with my fifth hundred of the season, in the decider in Pakistan in March. Between the tours of Australia and Pakistan, I had got married and rested up, but the knee started to act up in the practice game in Lahore and I missed the first game in Karachi.

On my return, I mustered a mere 27 runs in the next three ODIs. All the dismissals were similar. In each of those three innings, I was either bowled or trapped leg before by the ball coming in. A technical problem had crept in because my right knee was playing up. My left leg was going across, and as I tried to move it back when the ball came in to avoid playing around it, the ball was snaking through the gate or pinging me on my pads.

We had an optional session at the Gaddafi Stadium in Lahore a day before the final ODI, with the series tied at 2–2. I told John that I wanted to sort out the technical glitch, so I wanted as many net bowlers as he could muster. I requested our video analyst Ramki to record my batting. Any one of the net bowlers could have played for Pakistan, they were that quick and could swing the ball. I had an hour-long batting stint. Every ten minutes, I went out to Ramki to see the recording. I was closing my left shoulder, which was dragging my left leg across. I struggled for the first half-hour, but as I started to work on my shoulder position, I started hitting the ball a lot better.

Relaxed at having sorted out the issue, I was quickly into my stride, determined to build on the 34-run start Viru and Sachin had given us. I remembered again the batting goal we had set in Australia—the set batsman must play till the end. I didn’t manage that, falling in the 46th over to Shoaib Malik’s off-spin while looking for quick runs, but I had breezed to 107 off 104. Fans Indian and Pakistani rose as one when I reached three figures, but it was still only half the job done. It was a personal triumph for me, but the match was still to be won and lost. Irfan Pathan and L Balaji, our young new-ball bowlers, did the early damage and Sachin took an excellent catch at the boundary to dismiss the dangerous Inzamam, decisively tilting the scales in our favour. It brought a glorious season of ODI cricket to a close.

The only constant I had come to expect by now was change. Sure enough, I was pushed down to No. 4 during our next assignment, in July 2004, at the Asia Cup in Sri Lanka. Maybe five 100s in 18 innings hadn’t been enough, or perhaps Sourav and John had decided that the skipper would bat ahead of me, at onedrop.

My old failings returned, as did the old routine of playing one game and sitting out the next few. I didn’t have a great tour of England for the bilateral three-match series and the Champions Trophy, but was recalled without reason for one game against Pakistan the following March. That series was John’s last assignment with the Indian team. Greg Chappell took charge for the next tournament, a triangular series in Sri Lanka in July.

I’ve said this before, but when Greg came to India, he came with strong ideas about where our cricket should be headed and who the personnel should be. I clearly didn’t fit into his scheme of things. After two matches in Sri Lanka in August 2005 where I made 22 and 7, I was dropped for the subsequent triseries in Zimbabwe with New Zealand as the third team. I would have been happier had someone told me that the change of coaching guard had catalysed a change in thinking and strategy. But I saw the writing on the wall, and reconciled to the end of my 50-over career for India. I had Test cricket to focus on. I was now an established and valuable member in the longer format, so that’s where I had to channelise my energies.

Imagine my shock when, 16 months later, I received an SOS to join the one-day team in South Africa for the last game of the five-match series in November 2006. India had already conceded the series and there was little to be achieved by rushing me there for what in effect was a game of just academic interest. For some reason, the selectors wanted the vice-captain of the Test side to join the ODI team for a game of little consequence. I played in Centurion the day after I landed in Johannesburg. And I finished my one-day career the same way I started it—with a duck. To me, that summed things up.