The 17-year-old of today is a lot more mature, savvy and worldly wise than the 17-year-old of a quarter century ago. Kids now have greater exposure, awareness, and access to information, so they don’t remain ignorant for too long. In an era gone by, and particularly in a cloistered (though not suffocating) environment, we were less prepared to make decisions compared to the midteens of today.

But there I was at 17, having to make the first huge decision of my life. This time, there could be no compromise. It had to be this or that. So, should it be cricket, a journey into the unknown, where my future lay in someone else’s hands, especially given my lack of cricketing lineage? Or should it be academics, a degree in medicine, and following in the footsteps of my wonderful parents?

It seemed impossible to pursue academics and cricket with equal devotion at that stage—both needed my total, undivided attention. It is one thing to practise and play cricket in school, without compromising on studies, but it is quite another to embark on a journey to earn a medical degree, or any professional degree for that matter. Several of my seniors, and many of my contemporaries including Anil Kumble and Javagal Srinath, as well as R Ashwin in the generation that succeeded mine, managed both tasks simultaneously and successfully. But for me, it had to be one or the other.

I was extremely fortunate to have Baba uncle, who not only had confidence and faith in my batting talent and career prospects, but also played an influential and facilitating role in the decision-making process. I was blessed that my parents were understanding and allowed me to make my own choice. They did offer me insights into what each route entailed and laid out the pros and cons —an exciting but risk-ridden career in cricket as opposed to life as a doctor, with its myriad pressures.

They trusted my instincts and didn’t force me to pick one ahead of the other. They had faith in me, and it was up to me to prove them right, to prove that the values they had instilled in me were strong enough to be my guiding light for the rest of my life.

It couldn’t have been easy for my parents to allow me to put cricket ahead of academics. We were a middle-class family for whom academics was of utmost importance. They faced immense pressure from their peers; at social and professional gatherings, their colleagues constantly warned them that I wouldn’t be able to make a career out of cricket, and that being a doctor was a far more ‘sound’ and ‘solid’ proposition. This was back in the early ’90s, when cricket wasn’t anywhere near as financially rewarding as it is now. Friends and wellwishers felt justified in having and expressing these concerns. But I am grateful that all this didn’t influence my parents’ stance.

From an early age, I have been a big follower of my inner voice. You can affix various labels to it, I suppose. Intuition. Gut feel. A spark of inspiration. To me, it was and will always remain my inner voice, my conscience directing me along a path it believes to be right. My parents knew that I scrupulously followed my inner voice, and they were confident that whatever decision I made, it would be for the right reasons. When, driven by my uncle’s exhortations, I mustered the courage to tell them that my inner voice wanted me to pursue cricket, they accepted it with equanimity.

From time to time, I have wondered why my inner voice directed me to take the path it did. I haven’t found the answer, but when, at seventeen, it boiled down to choosing between cricket and medicine, the reason was all too obvious. I realised that I didn’t want to wake up one morning ten years later and regret not having given my all to the pursuit of cricket. This was my time, the time I could plunge whole-heartedly into cricket and try to break into the national team. I wanted to play for the country, with a passion that was obvious for all to see. It was this passion, this fierce determination, that my parents recognised and respected. They understood that I wasn’t being facetious or overambitious, without putting in the commensurate effort. They accepted that I was sincerely and whole-heartedly committed to my cricket. They were therefore happy to allow me to embrace the sport.

There was only one rider. I would have five years to make something of my cricket, five years after junior college to earn the India cap. If, by the summer of 1997, I hadn’t done so, it would be back to the drawing board, back to medicine. I could see the rationale behind it. Five years to ensure that my dream became a reality, five years to focus single-mindedly on the sport that meant everything to me. If, in those five years, I couldn’t make the next step up for whatever reason, there would still be enough time to write the medical entrance exam again, go to college, complete my education, and then wield the stethoscope rather than the cricket bat.

My parents gave me their blessings and would keep an eye on my commitment and my approach, but they wouldn’t interfere. They would follow my progress, but they wouldn’t remind me of deadlines and that I might be running out of time.

Even as my parents were happy to stay in the background, my uncle became my constant companion. His own cricketing career having been restricted to college cricket and the HCA league, Baba uncle took it upon himself to mentor and mould me, to expose me to the best coaching available, and to keep me motivated and encouraged at all times. He was with me every step of the way, living my dream, travelling with me on my journey, always supportive and understanding. I couldn’t have asked for more in terms of family support— parents who were willing to invest in me and an uncle who mentored and supported me in every possible way.

As 17 turned to 18 and 18 gave way to 19, I continued to climb the ladder. I was aware of the passage of time, but I was not worried that it might pass me by. Was I anxious that I would not make the Indian team by the time I was 22, and would have to jettison one dream to follow another? I can tell you with complete honesty—I was not.

The Bhagavad Gita has been a strong source of inspiration and learning throughout my life. My paternal grandfather, who had a massive influence on me when I was growing up, familiarised my brother and me with the shlokas, patiently explaining to us what they meant. Chapter 12, Bhakti Yoga, speaks of, among other things, giving one’s best every single time and not worrying about the results; remaining equanimous in victory and defeat, in success and failure. I took these principles to heart from when I was 17.

That’s why I didn’t worry about whether I would get picked for the Indian team when I turned 22. I understood that it was not in my control. The only way I could influence my selection was by scoring runs—lots and lots of them. But that was not in my control either, because there was no guarantee that I would score runs, no matter how talented I was. The only thing in my control was the effort, the commitment, the hard work, the dedication. So I immersed myself fully in cricket. My parents had empowered me by allowing me to follow my heart. In turn, I left no stone unturned in giving my heart and soul to cricket. If my best was not good enough, I could live with it.

This period of utter immersion in cricket meant no late evenings out with friends, no parties and no distractions, because practice beckoned the following morning. Several of my friends told me that I was missing out on all the ‘fun’ things in life. They asked me to loosen up, to enjoy myself, to go out with them to watch movies, and to not be obsessed with cricket. How could I convince them that I was having fun? That I was enjoying myself? That cricket was not an obsession, it was my calling. I didn’t just want to play cricket, I loved playing it. I looked forward to the early morning routine, springing out of bed and getting ready for the nets. After a while, I stopped trying to explain myself or my lifestyle. To each their own.

I think of those five years between 17 and 22 as the period of aspiration, characterised by the three Ds that I have always placed great faith in— Discipline, Determination and Dedication. If I worked hard during this time, it was with the awareness that I had my entire life ahead, to enjoy the fruits of my labour. As I grew older, I realised that the origins of many of today’s success mantras lie in the scriptures. Especially, but not exclusively, from a cricketing perspective—focusing on the process and not worrying about the result. The results take care of themselves if you do the processes right. That’s precisely what the Gita says—do your duty, but not with an eye on the outcome.

Effectively, it means the only thing that is in your hands is the effort. That is what drove me—the desire to not leave anything out when it came to effort. Once that was sorted in my mind, the path ahead was clear: focus on my cricket, on what was in my hands, on giving it my all, day in and day out, and to not ever look at it as a chore. If I didn’t plunge into it, I would be letting myself down, and also all those around me who had encouraged and stood by me.

From this realisation came the understanding that my outlook should not be shaped by runs, or the lack of them. I understood that one big score wouldn’t make me a different person overnight, or a failure make me a lesser person. There are great lessons to learn from success, and bigger ones to imbibe when it eludes you. Ultimately, your character cannot change according to the outcome. You are what you are as a person. Your legacy as a human being doesn’t depend on the results you produce.

This is not to say that I was indifferent towards success or failure. They affected me as they do every human being. But I learned to control my emotions and not allow them to rule me.