‘One of these days, Laxman will return from an overseas tour and tell us, "This is your daughter-in-law" ’, my father used to tell my mother, a broad grin on his face. He knew that the chances of that happening were remote, but it was his way of telling me that he and my mother would be happy with my choice of life partner.

I have been painfully shy around girls from an early age. Having studied in an all-boys school, I hadn’t met many girls. I was tongue-tied even around my cousins. I was comfortable answering questions, but I couldn’t initiate conversations on my own. And once cricket became my life, there was no time for anything else—no parties, no movies, no girlfriend.

In my early-20s, for some reason, the number 28 had got stuck in my mind. I thought it was the ideal age for me to be married. By 28, I figured, I would have settled down as a cricketer, made a career for myself and be in a position to make responsible decisions. I didn’t want to get married until I was convinced I was mature enough and responsible enough as a human being. I also wanted to be in a position where, apart from ensuring that my parents were comfortable, I had the means to take care of my life partner.

We were an orthodox, conservative, middle-class family, though both my parents were broad-minded and sagacious. While I was clear that my future life partner should share the same values and ideals, there was no pressure from my parents about what she should be like or where she should be from. Like they gave me the freedom to choose cricket over medicine, they allowed me to make the choice when it came to the most important partnership of my life. And, through the blessings of the Almighty and all our well-wishers, my partnership with Sailaja has been fulfilling and enriching.

There is a perception that the life of an Indian cricketer is all glamour and glitz. We are travelling most of the time, in Brisbane today and Bridgetown the next. The attention from, and affection of, fans is overwhelming. We are put on a pedestal and worshipped when we do well. We are seen with celebrities from Bollywood, we meet ministers and politicians, we go to parties, and generally seem to have a swell time. Which all happens, of course. But the hard work at the gym and in the nets, the insecurities that failures bring—these remain private.

Playing for the country and experiencing the highs that come from being in the exalted position of an India cricketer convinced me that I would be most comfortable with someone whose thinking matched mine. Amidst the hype and the hoopla, I had managed to insulate myself in my own bubble. I wasn’t Page 3 material. If at all I did figure in the media, it was because of my cricket. A majority of India’s cricketers have strong middle-class values and lead a simple existence. Call me old-fashioned, but I was looking for much the same traits in the woman I would spend the rest of my life with.

Not that I went looking, but I didn’t come across anyone I could relate to, anyone I could fall in love with. Several years after having played for the country, I would still steer clear of women, be it at family gatherings or official functions. My introverted nature and the fact that I didn’t know how to build a conversation contributed to that. Even today, I find it difficult to interact freely with people I have just met, be it man or woman. That’s my nature, and I don’t see that changing anytime soon.

By the summer of 2003, after the World Cup that I didn’t play, the process of identifying a life partner began in right earnest. My father had just retired from Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences. One evening, having ascertained that there was no girl in my life, he proclaimed, ‘My mission for this summer is to find a girl for Laxman.’ I was twenty-eight and a half, I had done fairly well for myself, and was ready to move on to the next, most significant phase of my life.

I am convinced that higher forces were at play in bringing Sailaja and me together. One of my father’s patients ran a marriage bureau, and when he came to know that Dr Shantaram was looking for a match for his son, he was happy to get involved. Of all the files he showed my parents, there was only one that caught their eye. 

By then, I had moved into an apartment adjacent to my parents’ because I needed space—physical space for all my cricketing paraphernalia. I used the apartment only to sleep in when I was in Hyderabad. I didn’t even have an operational kitchen. One evening, when I went across to my parents’ home for dinner, I ran into my aunt and cousin, who were visiting them. Inevitably, talk veered to my marriage and Poornima, my cousin, said she knew someone she believed would be the perfect match for me. My mother asked to see her photo. As destiny would have it, the photograph my father’s marriage-bureau friend had sent across and the picture Poornima gave my mother were both of the same person. Sailaja.

My father called up the number on Sailaja’s file and identified himself as Dr Shantaram, not as VVS Laxman’s father. Sailaja’s aunt, Mrs Jayalakshmi, answered the phone. Sailaja’s father, Ramatheerda Rao, was then the director of the mines and geology department in the government of Andhra Pradesh, and based in Guntur. His work involved a lot of travel, and whenever he went on tour, he dropped Sailaja off at her aunt’s place in Hyderabad. Sailaja’s mother had passed away in 2002, and her aunt had taken over the maternal responsibilities.

After that telephonic chat, my parents went to Khairatabad to meet her aunt and her father. Sailaja was also there. My parents returned home very happy. I could see that they felt she was the one, but they didn’t force my hand. Before I went to the United States to try and get the disappointment of being ignored for the World Cup out of my system, I met Sailaja for the first time at her aunt’s house.I am fundamentally opposed to the practice of going to a girl’s house and in effect judging her. How is that fair to anyone? But that was how it was with arranged marriages—as it is now. We had a nice chat; I remember telling her that the life of a cricketer was anything but a bed of roses. I also told her that the life of an Indian cricketer’s wife would be even tougher. It came with many attendant demands, necessitating plenty of sacrifices. A cricketer’s profession wasn’t a normal, stable 9-to-5 job. It involved loads of practice and even more travel, and that she should be prepared for the hurdles that lay ahead. I was keen to put all my cards on the table so that she knew exactly what she would be getting into, should she agree to marry me. By then, I had made up my mind to walk away from cricket. But I hadn’t even told my parents yet, so I didn’t discuss it with Sailaja either.

After that solitary meeting, I went away to the US for nearly a month and a half. Since I had not broached the possibility of a future together, Sailaja’s folks concluded that I wasn’t interested. Even so, during my time away, they did their due diligence.

Sailaja’s family was as conservative and orthodox as ours, and many parents from that background were reluctant to marry their daughters off to cricketers, who were seen as playboys. They did some digging, and came to the conclusion that I was the stable, steady sort. Her father cast his apprehensions aside, Sailaja was to tell me later, only because I was the son of Dr Shantaram and Dr Satyabhama. He was keen that she marry their son, who just happened to be VVS Laxman. Upon my return from the US, it was decided that Sailaja and I would get married, though I requested my parents to put off affixing a formal seal on our relationship for at least a couple of months so that we could get to know each other first.

Sailaja was only 22, and in the final year of her Master of Computer Applications course. Little did I know when I first met her that hers had already been a life of sacrifices, of putting family before self. She had been keen to graduate in engineering, but cast her aspirations aside after her mother was diagnosed with cancer. She had earned admission to a college far away from Guntur, and she didn’t want to leave her ailing mother, so she opted to forego her ambitions to take care of her.

A multitude of emotions ran through me when I heard this. She had been only 20 when she made this defining choice. I admired her courage, conviction and selflessness. It also spoke volumes for the values she and her older brother Anantram had imbibed from their parents. Anantram is one of the most intelligent and grounded people I have met. He topped his class at every level and had been keen to become an engineer, but their mother had wanted him to become a doctor and serve people, especially those in need who couldn’t afford decent medical care. All this touched a chord in me. Their family was much like ours, enveloped by love and compassion. She would be the daughter my parents didn’t have. I would be a second son to her father.

There was a reason behind Sailaja opting to get married as early as she did. Her family believed that if the marriage was arranged within a year of her mother’s demise, it would be as if her mother was performing the kanyadaanam. Sailaja and I met a few times after I got back from the US and before the cricket season kicked in. We discovered that our likes and tastes were similar, and we were on the same wavelength on most issues. We agreed that we would get married on my return from the Australia tour in early 2004. February 15–16 was the first muhurtham available and that’s when I embarked on the best innings of my life.

Sailaja was initially keen, after completing her MCA post marriage, to pursue a career in software technology, but I requested her to travel with me instead. I knew that she still carried the trauma of having lost her mother so early in life. Theirs had been a tight-knit family, and even though Sailaja was brave and tough on the outside, I sensed her anguish. I truly believed that if she travelled with me and met the wives of other players, it would help her cope better. Not that anything can compensate for the loss of a mother. At various times, Sailaja has told me that she felt I was like a gift from her mother. She was willing to do everything possible to ensure that my focus remained on cricket. She has looked up to my mother as her mother, my father as her father. To me, her father and brother are like my own. I zealously treasure the synergy between the families, and between the two of us.

Even before I got married, I knew how difficult it was to be the wife of an Indian cricketer. My colleagues’ wives had sacrificed so much and selflessly put their spouses ahead of them. More than anything, it was the travel that was the biggest challenge for them. They found themselves in foreign lands often and with few friends. Their husbands were preoccupied with cricket for most part of the day, and if it was a bad day at office, it translated into a not-so-happy evening together. The demands on cricketers’ wives are unimaginable. The more I have seen Sailaja and the wives of my friends in the Indian team cope with these stresses, the more I have come to respect, admire and appreciate them. Sailaja was interested in cricket long before we met, but when we travelled, she gave the impression that she wasn’t deeply invested in the game. When I got back to the hotel after a day’s play, cricket would never figure in our discussions. She intuitively sensed my mood. Whenever I was down, either due to non-selection or my own failures, she stood beside me like a rock, her support unwavering, her belief unshakeable. She can be cheeky and has a great sense of humour. She would drain my negativity away in no time, making sure that I was always in a good mental space.

My life became her life. A firm believer in God, she had one constant prayer—that I should do well, be successful and, more importantly, stay happy and healthy. Whether by coincidence or design, we have very similar tastes when it comes to food, or even movies. The only difference is that I love listening to a lot of music, while she doesn’t. I have tried many times, in what I imagine are subtle ways, to understand if she naturally likes what I do, or whether she customises her likes to be in tune with mine. But she has deftly sidestepped all such questions, which I suppose is an answer in itself.

Till such time that I was an active cricketer, Sailaja maintained that she would remain my second wife, playing second fiddle to cricket. I was grateful that she respected my passion for my calling. I was equally relieved that she was anything but insecure. She was sure about the kind of person I was. I wasn’t the type to look for a good time when on tours, and she understood that. She had confidence in me, and that gave me a real high.

What makes me particularly proud is that Sailaja has made a name for herself. She is not merely a cricketer’s wife. The way she has managed to undertake projects and pull them off successfully, working around the pressures of being a cricketer’s wife, raise two loveable and naughty children, and be a daughter and a daughter-in-law, staggers me. Her early experiences in life toughened her up, but they didn’t pull her down or make her a cynic. I have come across few people as mature, loving, caring and unflustered at such a young age. No situation is too daunting for her, and there is nothing she can’t do once she sets her mind to it.

After finishing her MCA, she completed a course in fashion design. She became my unofficial manager, and then a mother for the first time on New Year’s Day, in 2007. I was in Cape Town with the Indian team, ahead of the final Test against South Africa, when Sarvajit was born. By then, my father-in-law had sought a transfer to Hyderabad to be near us—he steadfastly refused to stay with us—and found an apartment no more than a two-minute walk from where we stayed. Traditionally, girls go to their parents’ house for delivery, and that’s exactly what Sailaja did even though my parents were keen that she stay at our place. During her pregnancy, she looked after not just herself, but also her father and her brother. Sometimes, words aren’t enough to describe your emotions. When it comes to Sailaja, that’s where I find myself.

Sarvajit has to be one of the youngest travellers anywhere. When he was six months old, he and Sailaja flew out to join me in England where I was playing county cricket. It was great to have them on tours. All the frustrations and disappointment of a tough day on the park would dissipate the moment I returned to my room to hold the little bundle of delight in my arms. Sailaja and I had discussed having two children—when Achintya was born on 27 November 2008, our little family was complete.

At various times, when Sailaja had the opportunity to make a career of her own, she voluntarily let it slide because she felt she had other responsibilities that were more immediate and needed her attention. As a daughter, she gave up the chance to become an engineer because she chose to tend to her mother. As a wife, she put my needs ahead of hers. And as a mother, she has left no stone unturned in making sure that Sarvajit and Achintya imbibe the same values that Sailaja and I did from our parents. She is extremely intelligent and capable, and could have made a success of anything she pursued. But it wasn’t until I retired from cricket that she allowed herself what she calls the luxury of chasing her dream.

I am extremely passionate about education, and one of my dreams is to set up a sports school in Hyderabad. In sync with my vision, Sailaja started a playschool in Hyderabad. She named it First Innings and she wants it to mushroom into a chain. Because she is so driven and because she is such a capable, hands-on administrator, I am sure it’s only a matter of time before that happens. I wonder how many hours there are in Sailaja’s day, and am in awe of how she multitasks so effortlessly. She is warm and giving, the rock around which the lives of those close to her—me, our children, my parents, her father and brother—revolve. She is the one even her older cousins look to for advice and guidance, and she has time and a kind word for everyone.

I consider myself both blessed and fortunate that the two things that shape a human being’s destiny—career and marriage—worked out so well. More than one’s career, it is one’s life partner who determines the future. Sailaja is most certainly my better half. I believe that is the greatest blessing the Almighty has conferred on me. And I am certain that her late mother’s spirit has played a huge role in this partnership too.

Sometimes I wonder what I would have done had the roles been reversed. I look at Mary Kom and admire her husband for the manner in which he supported her love for boxing and, through it, the country. What would I have done had Sailaja chased her entrepreneurial dreams and suggested that I sacrifice my cricket? Would I have agreed? Or would it have led to nasty confrontations and lives divided? I am glad we didn’t have to find out.