From the depths of despair, anguish and heartbreak sprang the desire to be the best team in the world.

By all accounts, 2000 was the worst year for Indian cricket. We had just returned from Australia, hammered in the Tests and the triangular series that followed. My personal cup of woe spilled over when I was dropped after the Mumbai defeat against South Africa. Then came Sachin’s announcement that he was quitting as captain after the second Test in Bangalore. The air was filled with uncertainty and dread. And just when you thought things couldn’t get any worse, came the bombshell.

We were in Bangalore, playing the Ranji Trophy semi-final against Karnataka. By close of play on day one, 11 April, both Azzu bhai and I had completed our hundreds and Hyderabad had reached 344 for 2. During the posttea session, I noticed unusual activity beyond the boundary rope—numerous news channel cameras had joined the few photographers who had been at the ground all day. I was surprised—why had so many media people gathered so suddenly?

Azzu bhai and I were walking back towards the dressing room at stumps, and hadn’t even crossed the boundary when microphones were thrust in his face. Journalists spoke over each other, shooting off questions that I didn’t comprehend. Azzu bhai was equally clueless. It was only when I reached the dressing room that Arshad Ayub, our coach, informed me that Hansie Cronje, the South African captain, had confessed to receiving money from bookmakers, and had implicated Azzu bhai too. I must confess that I went numb on hearing the name of my hero and idol mentioned in the same breath as match-fixing. Match-fixing. It wasn’t a term discussed even in hushed tones within our dressing room. But when it exploded in our faces in April that year, we didn’t know how to react. There was stunned disbelief and we were at our lowest ebb as the Indian cricket team, as a nation.

My mother had never met Hansie, but on seeing him lead South Africa with such calm and dignity, she had become his fan. To hear that two of my colleagues, who had touched my own family emotionally, were being dragged into this episode wasn’t easy to digest.

I have been asked many times how I could not have been aware that something was amiss. How we, as a team, could feign ignorance when some of our teammates were allegedly deeply involved. I can’t speak for anyone but myself. I truly, honestly, had no clue. I was so caught up in my own cricket and my own world, in my struggles to establish myself in the team, that I had shut everything out. My focus was obsessively inwards, it was as simple as that. It wasn’t easy, however, to insulate oneself from the anger and outrage that the fans felt once Cronje went public. I was then employed with Indian Airlines as Assistant Manager (Commercial), and among my primary responsibilities was routine interpersonal interactions. The constant taunts and barbs hurt, but I could understand the reactions of the fans. ‘You guys have let us down. We trusted you, we backed you, and look at what you have given us in return,’ they lashed out. To the fans, we were all equally culpable. We had been tried publicly and found guilty. Trust went out of the window. We faced a long road back, not just to win matches but to get back the confidence of our countrymen. And I didn’t even know if I figured in the selectors’ plans, which left me even more confused, helpless, and out of joint.

The long off-season gave us a little respite and plenty of time for introspection. Then came the ICC KnockOut Trophy in Nairobi, and the first indications that 
the tide would turn.

India had picked Yuvraj Singh and Zaheer Khan, two young men with exciting cricketing and crowd-pulling skills. Yuvraj had been the hero earlier in the year when India won the Under-19 World Cup in Sri Lanka, a powerful batsman and an electric fielder. Zaheer was a rare commodity in India at that time, an express left-arm fast bowler. They brought youthful intrepidness and intensity to the team, naturally aligning with the approach of the new skipper, Sourav Ganguly, by playing aggressively and never taking a step back. Sometimes, I felt that the cricketing gods had decided that Indian cricket had suffered enough, so they bathed us in their blessings.

We had a great run at the Champions Trophy, as Yuvraj and Zaheer made an instant impression in our march to the final. It wasn’t just that we started to win matches, it was also the manner in which we did it, that got the fans buzzing again. Even though we lost to New Zealand in the final, our brand of cricket was captivating. As a country, we were on the cusp of a new era. We had had enough of being the nice guys waiting for things to come to us. We were looking to make things happen, and the nation identified with the attitude and approach of the team. All wasn’t yet forgiven—I suspect it will never be forgotten—but we had managed to win back some of the fans, and the signs were promising.

Our first Test of the new season following the Champions Trophy was not just Sourav’s first as captain, it was also our opposition Bangladesh’s maiden appearance in the longer format. Sourav asked me to open the batting as we were only playing five specialist batsmen. I refused politely but firmly. I had been in good nick in domestic cricket and was looking forward to returning to the Test fold, but my experiments with opening the batting were behind me. If there was no place in the middle order, that was alright. I wasn’t going to make the mistake of sacrificing the pleasure of playing cricket by taking shortcuts anymore. Bangladesh offered stiff early resistance, but we were too strong and too experienced for them. Anshuman Gaekwad was our interim coach/cricket manager, but John Wright had already been appointed as India’s first overseas coach and was to take charge of the team during the home series against Zimbabwe. That summer, Rahul had played county cricket with Kent where John was the coach. Sourav had represented Lanchashire, and the three of them had several chats, after which John was appointed as India’s coach. None of us knew what to expect from our first foreign coach. There was no apprehension, just loads of excitement. Bob Simpson had been with us as a consultant, but that was more for limited-overs cricket. Here, we would have a foreigner interacting with us day in and day out.

We had a new captain, we had a new coach. Through accident and design, there was a structural revamp within the playing group too. Yuvi and Zak had already broken through, and a lot of other youngsters were on the rise—Shiv Sundar Das, Sarandeep Singh, Murali Kartik (who had debuted against South Africa) and Mohammad Kaif. We were in a phase of transition, and the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) had identified the Sourav–John combination as the core management group to take the team forward.

John joined us in New Delhi in November 2000, three days prior to the first Test against Zimbabwe. I am sure he was as curious about what to expect from us as we were about him. He had played and captained New Zealand in India, but this was his first time as a member of the ‘home’ side. For him, that first Test was about observing and learning, about getting to know us and our style of functioning. But it didn’t prevent him from exposing us to Rocket Man for the first time.

Midway through the third morning, Dasi brought up his first Test halfcentury, and raised his bat towards the dressing room. John stood up and clapped vigorously, then discovered that he was all alone on the balcony. He stormed inside and let us know what he thought of us. ‘Your teammate has battled hard and reached fifty, and you guys can’t even be bothered to come out and acknowledge his contribution?’ he shouted. ‘What’s wrong with you all?’ Point taken, John, even though that was a one-off. He had rudely shaken us out of our cloistered, self-absorbed world.

For John, the first few weeks were about learning about India, about being exposed to the superstar culture here. That he came from low-profile, understated New Zealand made it hard for him to understand why fans went berserk when Sachin made a regulation stop at mid-off. He couldn’t believe how so many people who had nothing to do with cricket had access to our dressing room. He was aghast at the kind of food we ate, both during practice and on match days. He made mental notes, perhaps not wanting to dive into the deep end right at the start. The winds of change would soon be upon us.

After the Nagpur Test, for which I was dropped, and the subsequent ODI series of which I wasn’t a part, John took it upon himself to watch domestic cricket. It wasn’t that he didn’t trust the other decision-makers. He wanted a first-hand taste of first-class cricket in India. He followed players rather than teams, which was why we ran into each other a fair bit. The Duleep Trophy had just started, and I was piling on the runs—a double-ton against West Zone in Surat, a big hundred against North in Vijayawada. John wasn’t going to base his judgement on the scoreboard or word of mouth. He wanted to see for himself. Within the first couple of months, he had a fair idea of the players, and how the system worked.

Our biggest challenge of the season was just round the corner, a three-Test series against Steve Waugh’s all-conquering Australians. We had all identified it as a huge opportunity for Indian cricket. John wanted to provide the tools that would help us compete favourably against Australia.

We have had camps before and since, but the one at the IIT grounds in Chennai ahead of that Australian series was the best I have been a part of. To me, that camp was the game changer for Indian cricket. Previous camps had been about coming together, hitting the nets, going back home. This one was different, invigoratingly so.

The first two days were devoted exclusively to meetings and talks. John had had a big role to play in the selection of 30-odd ‘probables’, and we spent the opening two days at Fisherman’s Cove with an emphasis on goal setting. For the first time, every single player was involved in the exercise. Players were encouraged to speak about personal goals, as well as those we had for the team and for Indian cricket. We were segregated into batting and bowling groups, and were asked to outline our ideas and plans. It was an interactive, corporate-type atmosphere, and a rewarding couple of days. John made it clear that as players, we had to take responsibility for not just how we played, but also how we conducted ourselves and shaped the character of the team.

This is what we arrived at after our animated discussions:

Batting goals: Bat four sessions of a Test, play out between 120 and 130 overs. Make the first innings count. Have at least one 100-run stand and two stands in excess of 50. Encourage contributions from the lower order. Don’t lose wickets in clumps.

Bowling goals: Aim for early wickets. Bowl in partnerships. Complement your partner, don’t compete with him. Understand when to attack, and when to fall back on containment.

Fielding goals: Improve fitness. Identify specialists for close-in cordon, and ensure that each position has multiple back-ups. Slip fielders were identified —Sachin, Rahul, Sourav and myself. We decided that it was mandatory for each of us to take 100 catches every day, even on match days. Common goals: Concentrate on getting better at running between the wickets. Remain aggressive in the field, throw yourselves around, keep energy levels high. Make lots of noise, show intent through body language. Each session would have a designated captain whose responsibility was to ensure that we didn’t lose intensity.

It was a whole new experience for us. We understood John’s vision, and told ourselves that if he was willing to invest so much in us, we couldn’t let ourselves or him down by slacking.

Then it was back to the nets, intense and well-defined, for a few days, followed by the Challenger Series. By then, Andrew Leipus had been with us as a physio for 15 months, also doubling as a trainer. Adelaide-based Andrew was very young, having just finished his master’s in physiotherapy. To be involved with a high-profile international cricket team was a massive opportunity for him. While he was on top of his game when it came to injury prevention and management, he learnt the ropes on the go when it came to training. He scrupulously followed the fitness routines that John wanted him to, and used the Internet to good effect to educate himself.

He was easily the most hard-working member of our contingent, with his day kicking off at 7.30 a.m. and not ending before 11 p.m. He was constantly in demand, but he did whatever was required with a smile, without complaint. On match days, his routine started with handling our pre-match warm-up drills, after which he’d rush back to the dressing room to tape vulnerable fingers, ankles, thighs. He worked on niggles and mobilised tight parts of the body, running from one player to another. During the lunch and tea intervals, he stretched players who needed loosening up and put the players who were not a part of the playing eleven through another set of training exercises.

At the end of a day’s play, he handled the cooling down process of the players, then took the reserve players to the gym for a brief workout. Once we returned to the hotel, he treated players with minor injuries—there was hardly an individual who didn’t carry an ache—so they would be fresh for the next day’s action. He squeezed in a hurried dinner whenever he found a few minutes. Andrew joined us just before the home series against New Zealand in October 1999 and effortlessly managed the twin roles of qualified physio and untrained trainer until early 2002, when Adrian le Roux joined us as the trainer. We soon discovered that Andrew was prone to panicking easily. He didn’t always understand why John wanted him to conduct a particular fitness drill, but enforced it nevertheless. We would rib him and ask him why he wouldn’t question the coach. Mortified that we thought that was even an option, he’d say, ‘How can I say no to John?’

Because he was such an open book, Andrew was vulnerable to practical jokes. He got married just before our tour to Zimbabwe in July 2001, and Harbhajan decided that he should welcome him back with a wedding ‘gift’. Bhajji was a great mimic who could impersonate just about anyone in the squad. He called up Andrew in his room one night and mimicked our manager, Chetan Chauhan. ‘We have an official group photograph at the ground tomorrow before start of play, so make sure you are in your formals,’ Bhajji Chauhan told him. The following morning, we were all sitting in the bus, some of us in shorts, others in track pants, when Andrew strode in impeccably dressed—official team shirt, neatly ironed trousers, tour tie and blazer, and gleaming leather shoes. Apart from Bhajji, no one had any idea why he was dressed thus. As he spotted us in our practice gear, Andrew’s face turned purple with rage and embarrassment until he heard muffled chuckles from Bhajji, who was seated at the back of the bus. We all had a good laugh at Andrew’s expense. To his credit, he joined us in the banter, perhaps secretly delighted that he had escaped lightly. We had had physios before Andrew, and several afterwards, but he was the only member of the support staff for whom the team hosted a farewell dinner when he left us towards the end of 2004. He was a consummate professional, but also a wonderful and trustworthy friend.

While Andrew was establishing himself, so was the team at various levels —Sourav as captain, John as coach. There was no Anil, there was no Srinath, both out injured for the series against Australia. It was a young side in terms of experience, but we also felt we had what it took to become a formidable team. The mindset was to start afresh, to forget about the past and look to the future. On the final day of the camp, we watched Remember the Titans in the hotel’s ballroom—an inspiring story of a team divided along racial lines but brought together by a common purpose. John had intuitively chosen the right movie, just as he had tweaked the right chords throughout that week.

As we exited the camp, we firmed up our long-term goal—to be recognised as the best Test team in world cricket. And how would we achieve that? By doing well overseas and becoming the team to beat anywhere, whether home or away.

To me, it was the perfect way to round off the camp—a meaningful, beautifully run one. I was all charged up, and I wasn’t the only one. India and Australia were in the nascent stages of what was to evolve into a fierce rivalry. But until then, the skirmishes had been restricted to the field. This time, things were different. Steve Waugh was busy making provocative statements even before his team left Australia, and Sourav retaliated in kind. This wasn’t something we had discussed as a team, it was just Sourav all the way. Our captain had a free spirit and didn’t hide behind diplomacy and political correctness. He spoke his mind, setting the stage for a fiery battle of skills and verbals.

Before the Mumbai Test, John sat me down for a long chat. It was a pleasant and unexpected surprise. For the first time, I was promised security and confidence, and that put me at ease. I am sure John had similar conversations with other players, helping them shed their inhibitions and fears. I was used to being ignored by coaches, and was grateful that John was making a sincere effort to make me feel like I belonged. He had seen me play in the Duleep Trophy, and he clearly liked what he saw. He told me, ‘You are on par with the main guys when it comes to skills. I would put you in the same league as Sachin, Rahul and Sourav.’ He called me Magician, and while that was good for the ego, it was the unshakeable belief he had in my abilities that lifted my morale.

It isn’t as if you don’t need an infusion of confidence when you are playing international cricket. Having gone through his fair share of tribulations, John knew what we needed, and when. He was empathetic, and his man-management skills were brilliant. He knew I was trying hard, perhaps too hard, to establish myself, and he took pains to put things into perspective.

‘I know you have been in and out, but for me, you are one of the best,’ he would constantly tell me. ‘Don’t feel insecure, go out and express yourself. That’s the freedom I want you to bat with. I can assure you that you will be here for the next 10 Tests.’ He had similar interactions with other players and our respect for him increased even more. Both then, and later, he didn’t lay too much emphasis on performance. His focus was on the process, on the effort, on playing with freedom and without fear.

Because he became so popular and revered in such a short time, he could also afford to tell us what we weren’t doing right. He was incensed that we were playing as a group of individuals, instead of as a team. One of his main complaints was that we were happy with individual milestones and didn’t hurt enough when the team lost. ‘I don’t care about milestones,’ he would shout. ‘Your job is to score runs and take wickets, that’s why you are getting paid. That’s why you are known as a professional cricketer. The country is doing you a favour by allowing you to represent it.’

John was looking for impact performances, which mirrored my attitude when I played for Hyderabad. That attitude, I realised, changed when I played for India. John made me realise that when I went out to bat for India, I was thinking of my own score. I was going out to score runs and establish myself, not to win matches for the team. John’s words, his attitude and his work ethic transformed us all. From 2001 onwards, we focused on winning together, as a team, with individual achievements becoming only an added bonus. The good thing about that young group—our average age was 25—was that everyone was receptive. Everyone believed that if we followed John’s mantra and married it with talent and determination, it would make a difference.

By the time of the first Test with John as our coach, against Australia in February 2001, we couldn’t wait for the action to start. There was a quiet confidence within the group. We understood the responsibility that rode on our shoulders. We knew that the task of restoring the belief of the fans was far from complete. We were a young team with two new openers, and there was no Azzu bhai, who had been banned by the BCCI. Interest levels were so low that advertisers and sponsors stayed away, and it was widely expected that we would be wiped out. Waugh’s Aussies were here to conquer the Final Frontier. We had even bigger mountains to scale, bigger goals to achieve than merely winning a Test series.

On a tough surface in Mumbai, we were level pegging for an innings and a half until Matthew Hayden and Adam Gilchrist took the game away from us. We were well beaten, by ten wickets and inside three days. In the dressing room, there were long faces and everyone started to feel that we were back to square one. John would have none of it, though. He sat us down and told us to analyse the game. For the first time after a defeat, we introspected in a positive and constructive fashion, and realised that we had done a lot of things well. We hadn’t done some other things well at all, such as capitalising on openings or piecing together partnerships. But while there was scope for improvement, we had no reason to be down on ourselves. When we left the dressing room that evening, we were walking tall. Previous defeats had attracted only unchecked criticism and harsh words from coaches. We used to slink out feeling small and ashamed, each one going his own way. This time around, it was different. We still needed a near miracle to stop the Australians in Kolkata, but I am convinced the heroics that came to pass owed their origin to both the Chennai camp and to John’s encouraging post-match deconstruction in Mumbai. Going into Kolkata, our confidence levels were high despite the Mumbai mauling, and we were determined to stick to our processes, cricketing and otherwise. Throughout the series, we targeted Australia’s captain verbally. We succeeded in rattling Steve because he had come unprepared for any sort of barrage from the ‘nice’ Indians. No expletives were uttered, but there was a conscious effort to engage him in his own mental disintegration battle.

In the decider in Chennai, Sachin took it upon himself to get stuck into Steve since there was little difference between them stature-wise. From wherever he was fielding, he would go within Steve’s earshot and say stuff like, ‘You are an Aussie, where is your aggression now? Scared of losing, are you?’ Or, ‘Too much responsibility on you now, Steve. This is your Final Frontier, and this is also your last visit to India. Desperate much?’ Sachin was playing with his ego, and succeeded when Steve was dismissed handling the ball, a rare mode of dismissal in any form of the game.

I don’t usually like to get involved in a war of words, but even I got sucked into the whole thing. Australia were a very good team, but they were also very arrogant. That is their personality and their character, and it could be intimidating if you allowed it to be. John and Sourav realised that we had to beat the Aussies at their own game to have any chance of success, and we did so— both during the defeat in Mumbai, and the victories in Kolkata and Chennai. We took some brilliant catches, and our fielding was spectacular at times. We were buoyed that we had come from behind to win a series that did not feature our two biggest wicket-taking weapons, Anil and Sri. Everything was beginning to fall in place. The vision we had set in the Chennai camp and the foundations we had laid were beginning to become a reality. What we had discussed was now in motion, the framework had started to take shape. The magnitude of the Kolkata win and the spirit we showed in sealing the series in Chennai meant the wooing of our fans was complete. Our supporters had been our unofficial 12th man, and it was great to have them back in our corner. Another tick in the Chennai Dossier.

It was the perfect end to a season that had begun with so much uncertainty and despair. It was now time to take the next step in our fierce desire to become the best in the world. That entailed winning Test series overseas. Our next three assignments were all away—in Zimbabwe, Sri Lanka and then South Africa, and they would show us where we stood as a unit.

During the off-season, we all worked on our fitness, following the routines systematically laid out by Andrew. Even though he was a physio, Andrew had a basic idea of fitness, and he was remorselessly pushed by John, whose intensity was infectious. John impressed upon us that fitness was in our control, that it wasn’t a reactive exercise. He wanted a fitness culture within the team that was second to none. We were introduced to the bleep test, which was a novelty because hitherto, we had never had an organised fitness test. The bleep test examined endurance, and we had other tests to examine other parameters like strength, core strength, flexibility and speed. We were all given individual targets, and if we didn’t meet them, there were penalties in the form of more demanding physical routines. The message John wanted to drive home was that talent can only get you so far. To be consistently good across the world, you also need to be fit so that you are as switched on at the end of a fruitless day as you were at the beginning.

The three away tours didn’t yield the results we were looking for, however. As good a side as Zimbabwe were at that time, we were clearly better. When we won the first Test in Harare, it seemed as if we would break our long overseas drought, but one poor session in Bulawayo resulted in a 1–1 series draw. In Sri Lanka, neither Sachin (toe injury) nor I (knee) were available. Sourav and Rahul fashioned a brilliant series-levelling win in Kandy, but we lost the decider. Each time we won a Test, we failed to back it up with another good result. We would start the next match slowly, hand the initiative to the opposition, and then play catch-up without much headway.

South Africa loomed next, and by the time of the Test series, we were back at full strength. Bloemfontein gave the world a first glimpse of Virender Sehwag the Test batsman. Batting at No. 6 on his debut, Viru made a spectacular hundred and put on more than 200 with Sachin, but we were still hammered by nine wickets. By then, everyone was beginning to feel the heat, not least John. He had arrived as a messiah and had got off to a cracking start at home, but we had lost four of our six overseas Tests. There was a mild sense of panic. In order to accommodate Viru in the playing eleven, Rahul had opened the batting in the first Test, a position he wasn’t comfortable at. After the first Test, it was decided that the batting order needed to be reorganised. I was asked to open the batting, and again I refused. Consequently, the day before the Port Elizabeth Test, it was announced at the team meeting that I was being dropped. On the morning of the match, however, a bleak and cloudy day, John told me that I was indeed playing. We didn’t make the most of the seaming track or helpful overcast conditions and allowed South Africa to post 362. At 119 for 8 with me on 38, we were staring at a follow-on. Fortunately, I found a doughty ally in Anil. A crisis invariably seemed to bring the best out of Anil as a batsman. He dug in while I played my shots in racing to 89. Our 80-run partnership helped us make South Africa bat again, and then Deep Dasgupta, the opener for this game alongside SS Das, and Rahul batted beautifully on the final day to help us come away with a draw.

That was as good as a victory for us, given where we had been in the match and how our season had gone thus far. However, our delight evaporated as more than half the team was pulled up by Mike Denness, the match referee, for excessive appealing and dissent. To make matters worse, Sachin was accused and found guilty of ball tampering. Sachin always had this habit of cleaning the seam—not picking the seam—to remove any grass that might have got stuck, and he only did so with his finger, never his nail. Without a proper hearing, Denness found him guilty of ball tampering, banned Viru for one game for dissent, and fined several others for excessive appealing. Consequently, the scheduled third Test in Centurion eventually became an unofficial game, and given our state of mind, it was no surprise that we were well beaten, with Shaun Pollock making an extraordinary hundred.

As a team, we found it difficult to reconcile to the results. We had not lived up to our own expectations, and had failed miserably in our mission to start stacking up overseas victories. We had showcased our potential in patches, but neither the batting group nor the bowling unit had been consistent in throwing up the kind of impactful performances that help win matches. We all took some comfort from having scored runs on tough surfaces against quality attacks, but in the broader scenario, that didn’t count for much.

The results notwithstanding, we were becoming more professional in our approach. A computer analyst, CK Nandan, who had played first-class cricket for Karnataka, travelled with the Indian team for the first time on the tour of Zimbabwe, and a few months later, Adrian le Roux came on board as the fitness trainer, exposing us to methods we didn’t even know existed. We were all aware that John was giving us every opportunity to be the best prepared we could be for combat. We needed to back his efforts.

It was in South Africa that John finally felt the need for a professional trainer. Andrew’s workload when it came to injury management had mushroomed to such a degree that he had little time to handle our fitness requirements. We lost the Bloemfontein Test in four days, and John decided that the scheduled fifth day was the perfect opportunity to see what Adrian, a Bloem boy himself, had to offer.

The team reached the Mangaung Oval in the afternoon, by which time Adrian had already set up training stations—not that we had heard of the term then—in different parts of the ground. There were cones, markers, the works. For the next 45 minutes, he put us through the most intense workout of our lives, taking us through speed, endurance, agility and movement drills that we had previously not been exposed to despite Andrew’s best efforts. By the end of the session, we were knackered. We had just played four days of high-pressure Test cricket, and this routine took everything out of us. That was one of the issues with John. While he wanted us to be the fittest we could be and his intentions were good, he didn’t understand when we needed to be pushed and when we needed a break. All that was to change once Adrian’s audition was successful. Adrian was with us for a little over a year—from early 2002 till the 2003 World Cup—but in that short span, he made a huge impact. He was obviously knowledgeable, and was also one of the most disciplined individuals I had ever met. We would have loved for him to stay on with us, but the demands of a young family meant he had to return to South Africa.

While there were basic fitness routines for the team, Adrian devised specialised training techniques for individuals based on how each player’s body reacted and responded. He was clear that our fat percentage had to reduce. Whether due to our eating habits or due to genetics, he said we all carried excess fat, so he introduced fat percentage parameters that we had to strictly adhere to. He brought in metabolism sessions—before breakfast each morning, it was mandatory for each of us to have a 30-minute session of cycling, jogging or swimming at a heartbeat rate of between 120 and 130. We all carried a heartrate monitor that charted calories burnt, and the intensity and duration of our activities. He had access to all these numbers. There were no short-cuts, no exceptions. You had to fall in line with Adrian’s demands to meet his expectations.

Previously, some of the players used to skip breakfast, but now there was no compromise on that. Everyone had to have breakfast before leaving for the ground which, by default, promoted team bonding. He streamlined the food that was served in our dressing room, cutting out fat-rich foods. Specific diet changes were advocated—for a vegetarian like me, whey protein was a must. The warmup routines, until then dreary and monotonous, were customised to the needs of each individual, and the training sessions became more systematic. It became mandatory for everyone to have an ice bath at the end of each day to cool our bodies down. After that, we would have the heaviest meal of the day before leaving for the hotel. Adrian kept a close watch on fluid levels, especially in the hot and humid conditions that take so much out of one in the subcontinent, and encouraged us to monitor our urine samples each morning to establish how much hydration and replenishment of salts was required. The shape of our practice sessions also changed. We no longer went to the ground two days before the game, instead feasting on a carb-heavy diet so that energy levels were high going into the match. We had optional practice or a very light session the day before the match so that we could remain fresh the following day. Adrian was a triathlete—he participated in races in Australia and New Zealand when he could—and thus set the example. As we started to see the results of his methods, we shed all inhibitions and fell in line.

The selectors rang in the changes in the bowling department by bringing in the uncapped trio of Iqbal Siddiqui, Tinu Yohannan and Sanjay Bangar for the home series against England in December 2001, which we won 1–0. Even as we played Zimbabwe again, in a two-Test series at home in early 2002, our eyes were trained on the Caribbean. For almost the entire team—except for the few who had been on the 1997 tour—this would be their first experience of a five- Test series. Our skills, character, fitness and resolve would be put through a stern examination against a strong West Indian outfit. We looked at this tour as an immediate opportunity to make up for unconvincing overseas displays that season. We still had the confidence that we could win anywhere, but while there were standout individual displays of brilliance, we were not able to deliver as a group with any consistency. It was frustrating. Every time we won a Test overseas, we immediately surrendered the initiative in the next. Maybe we were complacent after a victory, maybe we got a little carried away, maybe we were unable to come down after the mental high of an away triumph. Maybe therefore, we started the next match slowly and were immediately punished. We talked about this a great deal, and came to the conclusion that there was no point in overanalysis. The important thing was to take each match in isolation, forget the previous result and live in the present.

The West Indies series followed the pattern we seemed to have embraced irrevocably. Rahul got up after being flattened by a Mervyn Dillon bouncer to make a solid century in the rain-hit first Test in Georgetown, and we then went to Port of Spain, our favourite hunting ground in the Caribbean. I was striking the ball quite beautifully, and made twin half-centuries in our 37-run victory. The challenge was to avoid what had happened in Zimbabwe and Sri Lanka, but we failed on that count as West Indies immediately bounced back with a 10-wicket win in Bridgetown. We had not slackened one bit; we were still working hard and were as committed as ever, but defeat followed victory with the sureness of night following day.

The next Test at St John’s—the flattest surface I have played on—produced the most courageous act I have witnessed on the cricket field. Of all the people I have played alongside and against, no one had a bigger heart and showed greater fight than Anil Kumble. He didn’t have a negative bone in his body, and went above and beyond the call of duty to pull his weight. Even though he had a shoulder surgery and missed the Australia series in 2001, he was an integral part of our Chennai camp, working with the young spinners. At St John’s, Anil had his jaw broken while batting—also by Dillon—and was to fly back home during the middle of the Test.

We had declared our innings at 513 for 9 on the back of a double-century stand for the sixth wicket between wicketkeeper Ajay Ratra and myself, both of us making hundreds. Our total, imposing as it was, wasn’t going to challenge the strong West Indian line-up on the docile surface, especially without Anil to keep probing away. We were reconciled to long hours of toil when, typically without fuss, Anil made a dramatic entry into the middle.

He had ascertained that even though a jaw surgery was inevitable, he would not be aggravating the injury by taking the field for a session. Having found a doctor at the ground, Anil had his jaw wired. His face swathed in bandages, he walked out like a warrior going to battle. I couldn’t believe what I was seeing. Every step he took was a giant stride by a colossus of a man. I can’t even begin to imagine how much pain he felt as he ran in to bowl. His face giving nothing away, he put on an extraordinary exhibition of great skill and tremendous courage. For two hours, he kept West Indies on their toes, forcing their best batsmen of spin—Ramnaresh Sarwan, Brian Lara and Carl Hooper— to be at their most watchful. He trapped Lara in front and should have had Hooper as well in similar fashion.

Already a hero in our eyes, Anil’s stature grew manifold after that spell. His spirit and never-say-die approach were truly inspiring. He led us off the field to a standing ovation from the crowd and left for the airport from the ground for the surgery that awaited him on arrival in Bengaluru. There wasn’t a dry eye in the dressing room when Anil said goodbye.

To finish a career with 619 Test wickets is a fantastic accomplishment, but Anil is more than his numbers. He has the heart, mind and skills of a champion, the courage of a lion, the patience of Job. That day in Antigua summed him up like no words ever can.

Motivated by Anil’s heroics, we went to Kingston for the final Test in a happy space, even though the match finished in a draw. Five good days would give us our first series win in the Caribbean since 1971, and we knew we were good enough to do it. However, after conceding a 210-run first-innings lead, we scrambled to save the Test. West Indies had set us 408 for victory. Realistically, we had to bat out about 100 overs to secure a draw.

I had a wonderful time with the bat, having already made more than 450 runs in the previous seven innings. I was in supreme control and batting with the kind of confidence I had seldom felt in Test cricket. I knew that I could steer the ship to safety. We were into the final hour on the fourth evening, with Ajay Ratra and me in the middle of a partnership, when John sent out a message. His instructions were explicit: ‘Thundershowers are forecast for tomorrow morning. Just hang in there and see the evening through.’ Unambiguous, well-reasoned. It wasn’t that I disregarded his instructions. Because I was in such good form, I thought balls were there to be hit which might actually not have been there. I tried to pull Adam Sanford, got a top edge and was brilliantly caught by Dillon. I dragged myself away, aghast at what I had done, and my mood didn’t improve when Bhajji got out a few minutes later. By stumps, we were seven down, looking at another humbling defeat.

West Indies took a little over 40 minutes on day five to knock over the three remaining wickets and seal victory. The thundershowers arrived as predicted during the post-match presentation, adding to the gloom in our camp. As we packed our kitbags and readied to leave for the hotel, John asked me to stay back. He grabbed me by my hand and dragged me up from the changing room in the basement to the ground floor.

Pointing to the lashing rain, he told me bluntly, ‘We lost this Test, this series, only because of you.’

I was shattered. I was India’s highest run-getter, with 474 from eight innings. I was the man of the match when we won in Port of Spain. I had got runs in tough situations, batting alongside the top order and with the tail. When I heard John blame me for the loss of the series, I was both angry and upset. I asked him how he could hold me responsible, given my form and the role I had played in the Trinidad win.

‘I specifically sent out a message informing you that there was forecast for rain, so just hang in there,’ he replied. ‘You still went ahead and played the pull, and see what happened. All the hard work that you have put in, that the team has put in all these weeks, has gone down the drain. You put personal glory ahead of the team’s requirement. Do you still think I am wrong to blame you?’ John was most certainly not wrong. At a loss for words, I merely nodded in agreement. As a batsman, I had felt that the ball was there to be punished and so went for my stroke. But as a team player, it was my responsibility to curb my natural instincts, and I hadn’t been able to do that when the team needed it from me. It was just a matter of another 20 to 25 overs. We could have saved the match. That day, John emphatically drove home the message that it didn’t matter if you were the highest run-getter, if you were the man of the series. You had to play according to the requirements of the team, and I hadn’t done so. It didn’t help that the rains were so intense and sustained that the first two one-dayers, scheduled to have been held at Sabina Park, were completely washed out. Chastened and humbled, I took the message on board—team before self, substance before style. No compromises.

The away tours were coming thick and fast, and we welcomed that because it aligned with our long-term ambition of establishing ourselves as the best Test side. We didn’t take home victories for granted, but historically, India was a strong team in its own backyard. We worked as hard and derived as much satisfaction from winning at home, but because we weren’t used to success overseas, those wins were always that much sweeter.

The wonderful run chase in the final of the NatWest Series against England at Lord’s, orchestrated by young turks Yuvi and Kaif, served as a shot in the arm ahead of the four-Test series in the summer of 2002. India were known as poor travellers, a group that took time to adjust to conditions, which was why we invariably finished a series stronger than we started it. In Zimbabwe and then the Caribbean, where we drew first blood, we bucked the trend, but normal service was restored at Lord’s when England easily won the first Test on a very good batting surface.

Viru had taken such rapid strides in a short time that Sourav and John were averse to leaving him out of the playing XI. The middle order was packed, so he was asked to open the batting, a move that was to have far-reaching ramifications as time went by. Viru’s dynamism was just the fillip the experienced middle order needed, and it was no coincidence that nearly every overseas win over the next decade had the Viru stamp on it. That he was unfazed by the challenges of the new ball became evident when he smashed 84 off just 96 deliveries in his first Test innings as opener. He was to establish himself as the X factor, the one Indian batsman who instilled dread in the opposition and awe in his teammates.

Even from the Lord’s defeat, we drew positives. Our 397 in the second innings was then the highest fourth-innings total on English soil, and even though we were forced to dig deep, the experienced Rahul and the baby-faced Parthiv Patel, on debut, eked out a heartwarming draw on the final day in Nottingham in the next Test to keep us in the series.

Down 0–1 with two to play, we reached Headingley, the most English of venues, knowing that this was our best chance of squaring the series. The last Test was at The Oval, traditionally a batting paradise where forcing an outright result was next to impossible. Leeds had to be used to our advantage. And that was a tall order.

But we had our game plan in place. Over the first two Tests, we had tried to play the conditions, as you often should. But our faster bowlers hadn’t been all that effective. England’s batsmen were seldom put under pressure. In three innings, they had made 487, 301 for 6 declared and 617. Sourav was keen that we forget about the conditions and play to our strengths. We had two exceptional spinners in Anil and Bhajji—the former had played at Lord’s, the latter at Trent Bridge. It was time to unleash the two of them together at Headingley, on the most seamer-friendly surface in England.

It wasn’t an easy decision to make because if we won the toss, we would have to bat first to give our two spinners the best chance of exploiting the pitch in the fourth innings. The core batting group was not worried about batting first. We knew the odds would be stacked against us on the first day at the very least, and England had a strong pace attack—Matthew Hoggard, Andy Caddick, Andrew Flintoff, Alex Tudor. We could get serious egg on our faces, but we also knew this was our best chance to square the series. Was it worth the gamble? For sure.

We looked at it as a very positive move. Others called it ‘bold’, which to me is a euphemism for foolhardy. After the toss, which Sourav won, Ian Botham walked past me as I was taking throw-downs. ‘VVS, do you know that you guys have decided to bat? I hope you all know what you are doing. I can’t believe it.’ I told him that we as a group had wanted to bat first. He looked at me in disbelief and walked off shaking his head.

Sourav was that kind of captain, actually—positive and attacking, and not afraid of losing in trying to push for victory. It was in that regard that he was different from Sachin. During his tenure, Sachin also had the same aggressive mindset, but he was severely affected by the outcome. He was intense when it came to the result, no matter which side he was captaining. He became captain at a very young age, and didn’t have the same support structure to fall back on that Sourav had—and I don’t mean just from a backroom perspective. As captain, you are bound to experience great victories and miserable failures. Sachin allowed himself to be affected by the outcome. He wasn’t necessarily a bowler’s captain, and he could be very demanding. Because he was always thinking win, he didn’t have a defensive bone in him. In effect, even as captain, he used to think the way he did when he batted.

For Sourav, cricket was a game. He insisted on effort, and if he was convinced the team had given its all, he was okay with a defeat. While Sachin inherited a team of several juniors and the odd senior who had been around for more than a decade, Sourav became a captain of his peers. He had many to fall back on—Sachin, Rahul, Anil, Sri, myself—and he was receptive to suggestions, even if they came from the newest member of the side. Most crucially, he also had John working alongside him.

Sourav could absorb the pressures of being the captain of the Indian side like a sponge. He didn’t much mind losing, he didn’t care about his reputation as a captain. If you are mindful of your reputation, you end up being measured and guarded in what you do. Sourav wasn’t like that. He couldn’t care less what people outside the dressing room thought of him, and that was a huge blessing. Everyone in the squad trusted Sourav and John, and we all wanted the team to win. We had belief in our batting, and there was nary a murmur of protest when Sourav announced the day before the Leeds Test that if we won the toss, we would bat. We did, and promptly lost Viru in the seventh over, but then followed the partnership that defined the spirit and spunk of the team. Rahul’s knock was unbelievable but—and I mean this as a compliment— that was what we had come to expect of him. Sanjay Bangar played one of the best innings I have seen. In hostile conditions and against top-class bowling, in his first innings in England, he showed patience and impeccable judgement. I called him Gautama Buddha because he never showed any emotions. During their match-defining second-wicket stand, Rahul and Sanjay complemented each other superbly. England’s fast bowlers went flat out, trying to blast us out. With pluck and skill, Sanjay and Rahul first tired out and then deflated the pace attack. Even though both of them were subdued when it came to strokeplay, all the fast bowlers were exhausted within an hour after lunch because their best efforts were being met with barn-door resistance.

After they had steadied the ship following Viru’s early dismissal, Sanjay and Rahul started to capitalise on time spent in the middle. As English shoulders dropped, and the loose balls slowly surfaced, they played a few more strokes. In four and a half hours, they put on 170, each run pushing England back. They had the best of bowling conditions—a fresh and helpful pitch, overcast conditions, and the new ball—but they could find no way past the resolute pair. There was plenty of batting to follow, and England knew as well as we did that the momentum was firmly on India’s side.

Expectedly, Sachin arrived in a blaze of boundaries. After Rahul and Sachin piled on the runs, Sourav toyed with the bowling, hammering boundaries at will. Having expected to run roughshod over us, England were demoralised. The change in their mood was palpable once they figured that they would have to play a lot of spin on the third, fourth and fifth days against two quality practitioners of that craft.

Given how deflated they were after we had batted in the most difficult and unfamiliar conditions and racked up 628 for 8, it was always on the cards that we would complete the victory we were so desperately after. Anil and Bhajji took 11 wickets between them as we stormed to an innings victory. It was our first Test win in England since the 2–0 series triumph in 1986. For us, this Headingley success was as significant as the one in Kolkata. It reinforced our belief that we had the ammunition to conquer all conditions, in all situations, against any side, home or away.

The partnership between Rahul and Sanjay was the key to our victory. Rahul deservedly got the man of the match award, but we also had our own internal man of the match award, and the team gave that to Sanjay. Apart from his 68, he had also picked up two wickets in the second innings. It’s these kinds of contributions that John liked to highlight. The message he wanted to drive home was that this was not only a team of superstars, but also a team of onepercenters who would get recognition and respect. All of a sudden, we had a whole lot of new heroes, basking in the adulation that even a relatively minor contribution attracted.

The Oval surface thwarted any hope either side might have entertained of a series-deciding victory. England helped themselves to 515 after Michael Vaughan amassed 195, but we were not fazed by that total on what was a very good batting surface. Rahul was coming off hundreds in the previous two Tests, and his confidence manifested itself in a monumental 217 that led our reply. Sachin and Sourav helped themselves to half-centuries, and I chipped in with 40 as we batted around Rahul. When we were bowled out on the fourth afternoon for 508, there was little time left in the game. Everyone was saved the dreariness of a final-day batathon when rain prevented a single ball from being bowled. The series scoreline, 1–1, was a true reflection of the closeness of the contests and the strengths of the two teams.

We had less than a month between coming back from England and our next assignment, a full home series against West Indies, in October 2002. Having played so much cricket overseas in the last 15 months, we needed to adjust even to familiar environs. After comprehensive wins in the first two Tests, we were pushed into a corner in the final game in Kolkata. West Indies took a 139-run lead and we were four down for 87 when I joined Sachin on the fourth afternoon. John’s Kingston admonishment ringing in my ears, I bedded down. We had already won the series and this was what is popularly referred to as a ‘dead rubber’, but there was nothing dead about it for me. When you are representing your country, there is no such thing as an inconsequential match. Sachin made a majestic 176, while I was pedestrian in comparison. I batted nearly nine hours and kept out 396 deliveries, and when we shook hands on a draw, I had reached 154. John and I exchanged a knowing smile, though both of us also knew that nothing could compensate for the Sabina Park disaster that May.

After a tight one-day series that West Indies won 4–3, off we went to New Zealand where we had enjoyed very little success in the past. The World Cup was less than four months away and that, coupled with the need to make a statement in an unforgiving land, excited the group no end. The tour, however, was a forgettable one. We were routed in the Tests 2–0, and lost the ODIs 5– 2. Midway through the drubbing, I came to know that I wouldn’t figure in the World Cup. It was a dismal couple of months, the only constants being green, damp surfaces and sustained failures.

The pitches were far too loaded in favour of the bowlers. There was lateral movement throughout the Test matches, which didn’t last very long. The first game in Wellington was wrapped up inside 200 overs; New Zealand’s 10-wicket margin of victory was deceptive because it didn’t tell the whole tale. The second Test was even shorter, and New Zealand squeaked home by four wickets. With a little bit of luck, we could have won both Tests. We got the worst of the conditions, losing both tosses and having to bat on the first morning. I felt it was a bit of a lottery and to this day, I can’t understand why the pitches were so wet and seamer-friendly. Even the practice pitches were laden with live grass. Someone like Parthiv, who has no pretensions to being a quality bowler, was getting the ball to jag around a mile and getting batsmen out in practice! The quality of the Tests wasn’t great, but we didn’t lose confidence in our skills even though we lost both Tests inside three days each.

The World Cup would bring the curtain down on the season, but the Test commitments were done and dusted. Between the tour of Zimbabwe in mid-2001 and early 2003, we had gone on five tours and lost three of them, drawing the other two. We weren’t any closer to conquering away conditions, but we weren’t disheartened because we had not expected an overnight turnaround. We were aware that we had embarked on a process and that results would take time. We were happy with the way the team had progressed. 

Part of our cricketing paraphernalia included a portable drawing board that John would place prominently in the dressing room. There were columns for sessions won, lost and drawn; at the end of each session, John would rate our performance. We found that we had won almost the same number of sessions as our opponents in each Test, in each series. It was just that we hadn’t won the important sessions, the ones that mattered. While this necessitated soulsearching, there was no need to be despondent. We were a much fitter side, a much better fielding unit than before. The atmosphere within the team was positive, the vibes excellent. We were enjoying each other’s success, helping each other out. Win or lose, we didn’t stop having fun. Unlike in the past, we didn’t sulk or moan when we lost a match. That didn’t mean we didn’t care about the result. It hurt every time we lost, but our discussions revolved around whether we were focused on achieving team goals. The result was important, but it was not the only thing. We were confident that we were on the right track, that it was merely a matter of time before the wheel started to turn.

After the 2003 World Cup, when India lost the final to Australia—I wasn’t part of the squad—we had a long off-season and went our separate ways. I visited my friends in the United States and returned energised. The highlight of the 2003–04 season would be a tour to Australia for four Test matches in December–January, and we felt as a group that this time, we could score our first series win Down Under. The season didn’t begin well as New Zealand comfortably held us to a scoreless draw in a two-Test series at home, but our thoughts were already partly with Australia and we didn’t especially mind the stalemate. We were a settled team by then, and most of us had the experience of playing all over the world. We had become well-rounded cricketers and individuals, and several of us who had travelled to Australia for the embarrassing 3–0 rout in 1999–2000 were a part of the current squad. There were also exciting new players who had excelled away from home. Those that had gone on the previous tour had come back better for the experience, whereas Australia were still smarting from their defeat in India in 2001. They were thirsting for revenge. A cracker of a contest was on the cards.

As had become the norm, we had a couple of meetings on arriving in Australia. At the end of those sessions, our mantra was to become trendsetters —‘Let us do what no Indian team has done before’. Bruce Reid, the gangly former Australian left-arm quick, joined us as the bowling consultant, and he was to play a pivotal role in the education of Irfan Pathan and Lakshmipathi Balaji, our young pacemen. We were in a spot in the first Test at the Gabba, but bounced back strongly to finish the drawn game with momentum on our side. Australia made a typically brisk start and were coasting at 262 for 2 when we were saved by the rain. On resumption, Zak was outstanding. He bowled with pace and purpose to run through the batting and finish with five wickets. Australia were bowled out for 323 and we frittered away a bright start to stumble to 127 for 4 when I walked in to join Sourav.

Australia’s practice had been to target the opposition skipper—the head of the snake, if you like—and it was a joint effort that involved the players and the media. They weren’t too fond of Sourav since he had masterminded their downfall in India two and a half years earlier, and came hard at him. Sourav loved nothing more than a challenge. The scent of battle appealed to him. The faster Australia bowled, the quicker the ball whizzed off his willow. He had made a short trip to Australia before the series and met up with Greg Chappell for tips to succeed Down Under. Whether he put those learnings into practice, I am not sure, but he pounded the Aussies to all parts of the ground. I watched from the non-striker’s end as he took on the bowling and ran excellently between the stumps.

I had decided to put to good use the learnings from my previous tour of Australia, particularly from the 167 in Sydney in January 2000. I felt the best approach was to back my strokeplay. I had devised a game plan that I was confident would work, breaking it down into three basic elements:

1) To assess the pitch early and pick a length from where, even if the ball was in the line of stumps, I could let it sail by, especially early in the innings. It is important to figure out not just how to leave the ball, but also which ones to leave. The balls to let sail by, on almost all Australian pitches during that time, were those that pitched probably one yard closer to the bowler from a good length. On Indian tracks, balls pitching at that length would crash into the middle of the stumps. But in Australia, and especially at the Gabba, these would go above the stumps by at least a foot and a half, if not more. And if I played the balls pitched there, there was a high probability of me either nicking to the slips or getting into uncomfortable positions, with the ball hitting the top of the handle.

2) To desist from driving balls pitched in the good length area on the rise. Unless the ball was right under my eyes, I would put the drive in cold storage. Anything pitched behind the length must be played off the back foot, on both the off-side and the on-side.

3) To be mindful of the angle of the bat when I was playing off the back foot. When you are batting in the subcontinent, because of the lack of bounce, you play the punch with an almost vertical bat. In Australia, the bat has to be somewhere between vertical and horizontal, because you can then hit the ball into the ground. In the subcontinent, it is preferable to get behind the line of the ball. In Australia, you had to get beside the line because then you had the room to hit the ball into the ground.

That tour was easily the best I batted in my career. I had complete control over my instincts, and I executed my game plan to perfection. I watched videos of the opposition bowlers, so I could pick the length early from the wrist position. My coaches had told me in my formative years to watch the ball closely, to see which side the shine was on, and identify whether the seam was upright or the bowler was holding his fingers across the seam. But one of the other things I learned from the career-turning 1999–2000 tour was to focus on the wrist position of the bowling arm. When the inside of the wrist was upright and facing me, the ball would be pitched up. If the wrist was a little flexed and partly visible to the bowler too, the length would be shorter.

I backed myself to play my shots because I knew that if I was overdefensive, the Australians would offer no loose balls. They were consistent with their discipline once they knew that you weren’t coming at them. It was essential to let them know that you were up for a fight.

The surface was still offering the bowlers reasonable assistance when I walked in, but I have always enjoyed batting at the Gabba. It’s one of the better tracks on which I’ve batted because even though there is some lateral movement, the bounce is true and the ball comes on to the bat. That suited my style and allowed me to express myself.

I found my rhythm right from the first ball, and Sourav and I decided that we would not go into our shell. Particularly against Stuart MacGill’s leg-spin, we imposed our authority quickly, using the left-right combination to our advantage. He played a lot of drives and sweeps. I chose to drive, and also hang back and employ the pull.

Steve Waugh’s philosophy of captaincy revolved around looking for wickets. Because we were four down, he must have felt that another wicket soon would expose the lower order. He set attacking fields, and we cashed in with boundaries galore. I reached 75 in practically no time when greed got the better of me. I got a short ball from MacGill that deserved to go for four, but because it was so short, I had too much time. I tried to hit it very hard but owing to the extra bounce, the ball took the top edge and ballooned to point. I had got myself out and was disappointed at not getting to a hundred—I was in total control, on top of the bowling, and I had thrown it away. I did, however, derive pride from the manner in which our captain had taken the lead in making an early statement on the tour.

The only dampener in that Test was the loss of Bhajji to a finger injury. With 32 wickets in three Tests in 2001, he had been our bowling hero and we had expected him to tie up the Australians in this series too. Instead, he was forced to miss the rest of the matches as he underwent surgery on his bowling hand. This, however, opened the door for Anil to return to the side. With stunning results.

We left Brisbane delighted at the draw and with our confidence reinforced that we could beat this Australian outfit on their home patch. They were still a formidable side, but were missing two champion bowlers while a third was on the comeback trail. Glenn McGrath was out injured, Shane Warne was serving a one-year doping ban, and Brett Lee was just feeling his way back from injury. It was up to us batsmen to set the tone and give our bowlers the big totals with which to attack them.

Australia had a knack of mocking your plans, and they played true to character on the first day of the second Test, in Adelaide. With Ricky Ponting taking us apart, they rattled up 400 for 5 by stumps. It had been a long day for us, and we trooped back tired and somewhat dispirited. By then, we had taken to plastering every available space in the dressing room with positive messages, and those messages seemed to tease us when we slumped into our chairs. John, the master man-manager, took charge. He reminded us that in our team talks, we had agreed there would be tough situations, and that our real character would show in the way we bounced back. I won’t say we all felt 10 feet tall when we finally left for our hotel, but the world didn’t seem that horrible a place anymore. Anil had taken two of the five wickets on the first day, decent returns on his comeback to the Test side, but he wasn’t satisfied. Because of the shoulder surgery that had forced him out of cricket for almost a year, he had had to change the way he bowled. He wasn’t able to get the same fizz off the track, so he added new tricks to his repertoire. He started to bowl slower through the air, and developed two different googlies. He was a meaner, craftier and more skilful bowler, as he was to show throughout the tour, which he ended with 24 wickets from three Tests. And to think that he would have struggled to get into the eleven if Bhajji had been available. On such slender threads do careers change and fortunes oscillate.

Anil’s five-wicket haul the next day meant we could bowl Australia out for 556, but we lost early wickets again and were struggling at 85 for 4. Sourav had just been run out and when I joined Rahul in the middle, it was obvious that he was perturbed at the mix-up that had led to the skipper’s dismissal. Sourav had slammed a big hundred in the previous Test and we were already in a pickle before his fall, so that added to Rahul’s discomfiture.

We had two hours to negotiate before stumps, so the first thing I told Rahul was, ‘Jam, we can’t change what has happened. Put whatever happened behind you, let’s not lose a wicket till close of play.’ As always, Waugh looked to attack us, and we scored boundaries at will. I didn’t feel the pressure of the situation. It didn’t once occur to me that we were in trouble.

Especially when I played Australia in Australia, I felt every innings was an opportunity to exhibit my talent. I loved their attacking style, I relished the quick outfields that provided value for shots even on the vast grounds. I thrived on the pace and bounce that didn’t require me to generate my own power. When you experience that pleasure and all the strokes in your repertoire flow off the middle of the bat, you get into a zone where you cut out all distractions—the match situation and the scoreboard are nothing if not distractions. When we were in trouble as a team, I was blessed with the gift of taking these out of the equation. By close on the second day, we had put on 95 in quick time. We were still way behind Australia, but even they knew we were on to a good thing. The third morning, John appeared by my side as I was knocking at the Adelaide Oval and whispered, ‘Come on Magician, let’s have a repeat of Eden.’

That’s precisely what we gave him. Like in every partnership Rahul and I had, our focus was on the process. It was important to build on the momentum we had generated the previous evening, and it helped that Waugh didn’t have a sweeper cover in place for MacGill. He turned the leg-break a long way, but invariably offered a boundary ball in every over. The runs came rapidly, and it was nice to see Rahul playing with freedom. Both of us wanted to make this tour count, especially in light of our performances four years earlier, and when we punched gloves after a boundary or between overs, we told each other, ‘One more over. One more over.’

Our stand had mushroomed to 303 when I was dismissed on the stroke of tea for 148, to my first poor stroke of the innings. It was the last over before the interval, and my eyes lit up when I received a short ball from Andy Bichel. I went for the cut, but while the length demanded the shot, the line did not. The ball was not as wide as I thought, and I could not free my arms as much as I needed to. The result was a nick through to the wicketkeeper. I was furious with myself, but not because I had missed out on 150 or a double hundred. I hadn’t made the bowler earn my scalp. I had thrown it away.

Rahul, the master of mind over matter, completed a magnificent double and ensured that we got to within 33 of Australia’s tally. By the time he was last man dismissed, we were well into the first session of day four. Australia’s approach was always positive. If they sensed an opening, they went for the kill. They knew that their lead was marginal and that it was still a good batting strip, so they came out typically gung-ho, wanting to pile on the runs quickly and set it up for their bowlers to take over. As it turned out, it was this very attitude that cost them dear.

I remember telling Rahul while standing alongside him in the slips, that the Australian batsmen were trying too hard and taking far too many risks. By contrast, Sourav was not over attacking. He had good fields, and was backed by a wonderful spell from Ajit Agarkar. Ajit had established himself as a serious wicket-taker in one-day cricket, but he was still coming to grips with Test cricket. It didn’t help that he was in and out of the Test side, but that afternoon, he was spot-on with his lines. He gave nothing away, bowled wicket-to-wicket and got the ball to move just a little. In going for extravagant strokes, Australia paid the price. Sachin then chipped in with his leg-spin picking up the important scalps of Damien Martyn and Steve Waugh, both expertly caught by Rahul at slip. Australia were bowled out for 196 with Ajit returning 6 for 41. Our target was 230, and time was not a factor. It was our game to win. Or lose. 

It was a somewhat nervous chase, as you might expect. We got partnerships but we also lost wickets, though we were never in serious danger of losing the game. We needed 60 when it was my turn to bat, and I hit a few boundaries quickly to take us to within nine of the target. In trying to clear Simon Katich’s left-arm wrist-spin over the infield, I holed out to mid-wicket, but Rahul stayed on to apply the finishing touches, memorably kissing the crest on his cap as he shuffled to the winning run. It was a sweet, sweet victory, against Australia in Australia. It had come after being well behind the game at the end of day one, then day two. It gave us the assurance, like Headingley had done, that we could win anywhere, from any position.

For more than four hours on day one of the Boxing Day Test, we seemed to have shed our post-victory blues of the past. Viru was truly magnificent in the third Test in Melbourne, caning the bowling with disdain. He forged a strong opening alliance with Aakash Chopra. These two men from Delhi were diametrically opposite in their approach, and that was great for us. Viru would take the bowling on, while Aakash put a huge price on his wicket and accomplished the unenviable task of taking the shine off the new ball and tiring out the fast bowlers so that the rest of us could come in and play our strokes.

They added 141, and when Viru and Rahul were involved in a second hundred stand in succession, we were in total control. Australia were on the back foot, scrambling for cover, such was the ferocity of Viru’s strokeplay. As was typical, he was dismissed going for a six to bring up his double hundred, triggering a collapse we were powerless to stop. From 278 for 1, we rolled over for 366. Australia were all over us with Ricky breezing to another double ton. We suffered a second batting meltdown and were spanked by nine wickets. The old bogey had raised its head again.

Sachin, meanwhile, was having a quiet series with the bat, and it was beginning to get to him. After the Melbourne defeat, he pulled me into the meeting room for a chat. He took great pride in scoring runs for the team, and he was hurting because he felt he was not contributing with the bat. He had been dismissed in different, freakish ways—adjudged leg before when he offered no stroke to a ball that was clearly going above the stumps, strangled down leg. But he felt the one shot that had let him down was the cover drive. It worried him that he was regularly being sucked into playing that stroke. I sensed that more than anything else, he was looking for reassurance. I told him that he was hitting the ball well, that it was just a matter of time before he turned it around.

Despite the Melbourne loss, we were not downcast heading into the final Test in Sydney. The conditions there were more suitable, and we had two quality spinners in Anil and Murali Kartik, who were ready to pounce on any assistance from a historically spin-friendly surface. Sourav’s luck with the coin held, and Viru and Aakash gave us another great start, putting on 123. Our game plan revolved around stacking up a massive total and then strangling the Aussies through scoreboard pressure. It was Steve Waugh’s final Test and all through the series, we had felt that the Australians were distracted by the events surrounding their long-standing captain’s imminent departure. We were in pounce mode, hoping to cash in if they faltered even a tiny bit.

I was involved in a second triple-hundred stand of the series, but this one was an absolute education. It was a lesson in restraint and self-control. As batsmen, we all make plans. We cut out some shots in the early part of our innings, take our time assessing the pitch and the bowling, and once we get our eye in, we play all the shots in our arsenal. Not Sachin, not that innings. Having determined after Melbourne that the cover drive was his bête noire, Sachin consciously cut the shot out of his armoury. He didn’t play the cover drive as he reached 50, he didn’t do so when he crossed 100, and he continued to ignore it after he passed 150.

I was as determined as Sachin that I should produce a big knock, but for entirely different reasons. While he was short of runs, I was batting beautifully and wanted to make my form count. But I also wanted to put on an exhibition for my parents, who had come to Australia for the Boxing Day and New Year Tests. The first time they had watched me ‘live’ at the ground was at the Melbourne Cricket Ground, but I let them and the team down by making only 19 and 18. Despite my travails, they had a wonderful time, sitting alongside Matthew Hayden’s parents. My father told me that when Haydos completed his century and raised his bat in the direction of his parents, they beamed with pride and delight. I wanted my parents to experience the same emotions. My parents hadn’t met an Australian couple before, and couldn’t stop talking about how wonderful Haydos’s mom and dad were. ‘Different country, different culture, but the same as us,’ my father told me. I was relieved that their short tour of Australia had got off to the perfect start. It was up to me to make sure that the rest of their stay was as memorable.

The team spent New Year’s eve on a yacht at Darling Harbour, where we took the opportunity to refocus on our desire to be trendsetters. We were still in the series, and we had got off to a cracking start. I wanted to do something special for my parents. These were my thoughts as I took guard. After that, my mind went blank, and the distractions disappeared.

We comfortably saw off the 90 minutes to close on the first day and when play started on day two, I stayed true to my game plan. I gave the first half-hour to the bowlers, playing exclusively in the V. Once I was confident that I had the measure of the conditions and the bowling, the V slowly widened. Without making a conscious effort, I began dealing in boundaries, including four in one Brett Lee over. I was capitalising on picking the length early, having honed my preparations even earlier.

A lot of the time, when you are playing with a blank mind and when you have done your homework, you surprise yourself with your batting. It is as if the ball is at your mercy, waiting for your command so that it can do your bidding. There is the danger, of course, of getting carried away. So I told myself that as long as I played the shots I was good at, it didn’t matter if I played too many shots. I was a touch and rhythm player, but I have been guilty of falling prey to a mental error after a rush of boundaries. That wasn’t happening in this series because I wasn’t being overambitious in my shot selection.

I got the impression as I stacked up the boundaries that Waugh felt he was always one fielder short. He wasn’t sure what fields to set, because I played balls pitching on the same spot to different parts of the ground. If the ball was pitched up outside off, I opened the face of the bat and played it to covers. To a similar ball, I also either played with a straight bat to mid-off, or closed the bat face and used my wrists to play to mid-on. Likewise, off the back foot, to short balls pitching in the same area, I either played the back-foot punch through cover, or directed it to mid-wicket with my wrists.

I celebrated my hundred in my usual manner—helmet off, hands thrown up in the air, a big smile on my face, but nothing exaggerated. I first waved to the dressing room, acknowledging the support of my mates, then turned towards the Corporate Box where I knew my parents were seated and raised the bat in their direction. I couldn’t see them, but I knew they were there, and I knew they could see me. My father hadn’t even watched me on TV previously, he got updates on my performances from patients at his clinic! My mother would watch a little bit here and there, but her primary source of information was my uncle. This was only the second time they had watched me bat in person, and I was thrilled to salute them with a hundred—my way of saying thank you to them for allowing me to chase my dream.

It was the first time my parents were being exposed to reactions from the crowd. ‘The standing ovation you received was my proudest moment,’ my father told me. I was even more proud to have scored a hundred with my parents in the audience.

I got out to the third new ball for 178, but this time there was no disappointment. It was one of the best deliveries I received in my career. Jason Gillespie nipped one back sharply from outside off after landing it on the seam, and found the gap between my bat and my pad to rattle the middle stump. When you know that you have got out to a good ball and that you haven’t given it away, you can live with it.

As I walked off elated, the crowd rose again to applaud my effort. I was happy that Sachin and I had put on 376, and taken the team to a position from where we could hope for a series-deciding victory. When I entered the dressing room, the whoops and cheering lifted my spirits further. Every member of the team was genuinely happy for me. That was the beauty of that team. There was nothing affected about the celebrations. Everyone spontaneously celebrated others’ successes.

Meanwhile, throughout his innings, not once did Sachin deviate from his methodology of taking the off-side out of the picture. Even full-tosses and halfvolleys from regular bowlers and part-timers alike were steadfastly ignored, and when Sourav applied the closure on the third morning, Sachin had reached his Test-best 241. We had amassed 705 for 7.

Langer and Hayden teed off and Simon Katich made a century, but Anil’s tireless, crafty, marathon 46.5-over spell that netted him eight wickets gave us a healthy lead of 231. We batted on to extend that advantage to 442, giving ourselves nearly 95 overs to bowl Australia out. But the surface didn’t help our spinners even on the fifth afternoon, and when Australia might have wobbled, their fantastic captain bailed them out. Tough as nails and always at his best in the face of adversity, Steve ground out a typical fighting 80, steering his side to safety. For us, it was a glorious opportunity lost, but we weren’t disheartened. We had left these shores four years earlier after a fearful pounding. This time, we had held our own and, apart from at Melbourne, were clearly the stronger side. It was a big improvement from 2000—2–1 would have been brilliant, but 1–1 wasn’t the worst result. More importantly, we had proved to ourselves that the New Zealand series had been a one-off dictated by the conditions, and that we were more than equipped to tackle challenges overseas.

Whispers of a potential tour to Pakistan had started to surface midway through the tour of Australia. We couldn’t ignore them, but we couldn’t allow them to take our focus away from the task at hand either. India’s prime minister, Shri Vajpayee, wanted the tour to go ahead as another attempt to build bridges between the nations. It wasn’t until after the Sydney Test that a delegation from New Delhi came over to Australia along with some members of the BCCI to discuss the modalities, and we were all grateful for the timing—at the end of the Test series, so that there were no distractions.

The delegation held a meeting with some of the more experienced players to ascertain our stand on touring Pakistan. We were appreciative of this too. The tour wasn’t foisted upon us, we were given the option to discuss and disagree if we so felt, but we all instantly agreed to do our bit to support our prime minister’s objective. That we were promised the best possible security was a bonus. As sportspersons, as ambassadors of our game and more importantly our country, we felt privileged to be in a position to bring people together. We went to Pakistan not long after the conclusion of the triangular series in Australia, and the reception we got when we landed in Lahore was heartwarming. We could see genuine love and respect in the eyes of our friends from across the border. What we struggled to get used to was the overwhelming security cover that was thrown around us. We had heard stories of the dragnet around the Indian team when they had travelled to Sri Lanka during the civil war there, but apart from Sachin, no one else had encountered this level of security. Our routes were kept secret and wherever we turned, we found security personnel and commandos. It was a first for all of us, and it highlighted the sensitivity of the tour.

It was a little disquieting, but we felt no fear or apprehension. We had complete faith in the people looking after us, and as the tour went on, we learnt to ignore the ubiquitous gun-toting personnel. Within the team, there was anticipation, expectation and excitement. For some strange reason, there was no pressure whatsoever. It was the first time in Pakistan for almost everyone in the squad, and we soon felt at home as the welcoming hospitality of our hosts enveloped us.

The hospitality didn’t extend to the playing field, of course. India and Pakistan have been fiercely competitive rivals, with no quarter asked and none given. We were exposed to that harsh reality—not that we expected anything different—in our only practice game in Lahore before the one-day series. We thought we had enough on the board when we rattled up 335, but Imran Nazir and Taufeeq Umar toyed with us. They put on 127 in less than nine overs, and we were hammered with four overs to spare. We hadn’t arrived here expecting to run roughshod over Pakistan, but this game confirmed what our pre-tour analysis had told us—Pakistan were a brilliant side brimming with talent, and we had our work cut out. We still carried the confidence from Australia that we were second to none. The level of your game goes up when you play a strong opposition. Automatically, you become better as individuals and as a team. The warm-up drubbing was a wake-up call. Perhaps subconsciously, we had been caught up in all the paraphernalia of touring Pakistan. But our identities stemmed from what we did on the cricket field, and we were determined to shut everything else out once we crossed the white line.

The one-day series was a fascinating battle of wits and skill. I missed the first ODI after aggravating a strain in the knee in the practice game and when I returned, I had modest returns in the next three matches. The teams traded blows equally so that when we went into the decider in Lahore, the series was tantalisingly poised at 2–2. No Indian team had won a series in Pakistan before and we were aware of that. And while we wanted to create history, we chose to live in the moment and not get too far ahead of ourselves.

I rediscovered my touch in the last ODI as the runs came freely. The timing was back and I found the boundaries with ease as I brought up a very satisfying fourth hundred of the year. It took us to 293, a very big total in 2004. That was magnified by the fact that it was the decider and that it was an India-Pakistan game. Irfan and Bala were excellent up front and Sachin took a superb leaping catch at long-on to dismiss Inzamam-ul-Haq. A back injury to Sourav was the only discordant note as we surged home by 40 runs and sealed the series 3–2. Much of the talk during team meetings was about keeping things simple, playing our natural game and not getting intimidated.  We knew that there would be loads of support for Pakistan, but there was a steady stream of people who travelled from India to keep our spirits high and our tricolour fluttering in the stands. We weren’t unaware of the expectations back home, and from millions of our countrymen in different parts of the globe. We spoke of the dangers of getting emotionally attached to these extraneous factors, and emphasised staying in our bubble and not getting distracted. The ODI series triumph was a huge shot in the arm, but three Tests still remained to be played.

Sourav wasn’t available for the first Test, but that didn’t knock us off kilter. Rahul had led previously and our philosophy was a shared one. We were not individual-driven but spurred by our goals and ideals, and while we would miss Sourav, it wouldn’t be a crippling blow. Our batting was strong, experienced and in form. The bowling was young and energetic and on the upward learning curve. Irfan was bowling really well, and Pakistan saw the blossoming of young Bala, who was unfortunate to have injuries cut short what could have been a storied career. Bhajji wasn’t around, but Anil had rediscovered himself, and Sachin was bowling his leg-spin the best he had ever done in his life. Everything was beautifully set up. All we had to do was stick to our processes and not stray from the charted path.

After the packed stands during the ODIs, the turnout was somewhat underwhelming for the Test series, which kicked off in Multan. Perhaps the heat, the distance of the ground from the city centre, and the fact that school exams were on, led to the lukewarm response, but that wasn’t for us to lose sleep over. Rahul won a very good toss and as they had done in Australia, Viru and Aakash got us off to a solid start. Or rather, Aakash was solid, while Viru was spectacular.

He put on an absolute exhibition, dismissing the ball from his presence with total disdain. The harder Pakistan tried, the quicker he scored. Sachin was happy to bat in his younger partner’s shadow and by the end of day one, we had already stacked up more than 350 runs.

It didn’t take Viru all that long on the second morning to become India’s first triple centurion in Tests. It couldn’t have come sooner. For all our batting riches, 281 as the highest score by an Indian wasn’t particularly edifying. We needed to get into the 300-club, and while many professed surprise that Viru was the first one there, I wasn’t among them. Viru had the strokes and the smarts to go with adequate technique, and because he scored so quickly, he had a very good chance of stacking up the records so long as he didn’t get bored and do something daft.

When Viru strode back after a mesmerising 309, the focus shifted to Sachin’s double hundred. More than a decade after Vinod Kambli had scored back-to-back doubles for India, Sachin was on the verge of emulating his childhood buddy. I had failed to cash in on the run fest, run out after a mix-up with Sachin. I wasn’t a great one for watching the action, so when I was in the dressing room, I would put on my headphones and go to sleep. Someone would wake me up when a teammate reached a milestone and I would join in the celebrations.

As a hand gently nudged me and I slid the headphones off my ears, I heard the words, ‘Get ready, we are fielding.’ I was irritated that no one had woken me up when Sachin reached his 200, but as I opened my mouth to protest, I sensed a certain unease, if not disquiet, in the room. It was then that I learnt that Rahul had applied the closure with Sachin on 194.

It was obvious, looking at Sachin, that he was upset. At the end of the day’s play, he hit the gym and started to lift heavy weights to try and get whatever he was feeling out of his system. But his frustrations didn’t boil over to the team. He was mature enough to not let off steam in front of the others, and while we all felt for him in our own ways, we didn’t discuss the merits or otherwise of Rahul’s decision. By now, the team ethos was very strong—the focus was on the group rather than on individuals, and it was time to focus on what we had to do as a unit on the field.

From time to time, I would glance surreptitiously at Rahul to see if he was feeling any pressure, but he seemed perfectly in control of himself. Seeing the captain thus, whatever vestigial apprehensions there might have been vanished for the rest of the boys. Winning the Test and the series was the bigger goal, and nothing could divert our attention from that. We had a fabulous mix of experienced heads and youthful energy, but the biggest advantage was that the lines of communication were always open. Rahul and Sachin had a chat about it the morning after the declaration and decided to draw a line in the sand. Credit to both for handling a delicate situation with such equanimity.

Pakistan battled hard in response to our 675, but they were always up against it. Irfan and Bala were excellent, and I was particularly impressed with how far Bala had come in such a short time. When he came to Australia, Bala was predominantly an inswing bowler; by the time he left that country three months later, he had added the outswinger to his armoury, thanks entirely to Bruce Reid, who had joined us as the bowling consultant. Bruce had been tireless in his work with Bala and Irfan, and the results were obvious in Pakistan. Bala was getting the ball to shape away from the right-handers, while Irfan was swinging the new Kookaburra in late. Zak’s experience and Anil’s expertise were on show, and we forced Pakistan to follow-on even though we had spent more than eight hours on the field.

Zak didn’t bowl a single over in the second innings—his was a career littered with injuries, especially in the first half—but Anil was relentless as he hunted Pakistan down with 6 for 72. Fittingly, it was Rahul who held the catch to formalise our innings victory. History was within our grasp.

On to Lahore, and to a familiar, frustrating, maddening, inexplicable encore. We seemed to have learned little from the past. This was becoming something of a bad habit. Perhaps we were drained after an emotional victory, perhaps we didn’t recover well in the short time between the two Tests. Perhaps those are just excuses. No matter. Umar Gul and Pakistan blew us away on the first day, and there was no coming back. Yuvi made an outstanding hundred on a seaming track but that was about it as we were rolled over for 287. Once Pakistan opened up a 200-run lead, we surrendered meekly. In the matter of a week, the fight had ebbed out of us. Maybe we were still happy with just the one win. Maybe for all our tall talk and supposed ambition, we weren’t committed enough.

To address these issues once again, we had a fruitful team talk on arriving in Rawalpindi for the final match of the tour. Sourav had rejoined us—he had returned to India for treatment on his back at the conclusion of the first Test— and with the full complement at our disposal, it was important for us to regroup. We always had good chats after a defeat and spoke at length about our determination to bounce back, but it was a concern that we were backing up good wins with careless defeats. It all boiled down to attitude. We were still strong as a cricketing group, but collectively we were not able to maintain the momentum, often starting poorly and playing ourselves out of the contest.

We revisited the Lahore debacle and stressed the significance of partnerships, with bat and ball. We had to avoid losing wickets in clusters. And when bowling, if wickets didn’t fall, then we had to maintain pressure through dot balls and maiden overs. Simple, basic stuff, but stuff that needed to be talked about anyway. Individually, several of us were fired up. Rahul hadn’t got a big score, I hadn’t made a significant contribution. We also had a selection dilemma. With Sourav back, someone had to make way for him. Normally, it would have been the one who replaced him in the XI, but given what Yuvi had done in the previous game, it was impossible to leave him out.

So, who then? Unfortunately, the axe fell on Aakash. He might not have made massive scores, but alongside Viru, he had given us great starts in Australia and here in Pakistan. He had seen off the new ball expertly, driven the bowlers to exasperation with his resolute occupation of the crease. It wasn’t fair to him, but Aakash showed great character in accepting the decision with poise. Parthiv was pushed up to open the batting, and I felt for him. To open the batting in a Test match after keeping wicket is a huge demand physically and mentally, but Parthiv was mature and responsible beyond his years. He is one of those silent, unsung heroes who did everything and more that the team asked of him, uncomplainingly and with a smile. There is a huge heart inside that little frame, and he rose to the occasion by making 69 after having donned the big gloves for 73 overs on the first day. When he and Sachin fell within one run of each other, we were 130 for 3 in reply to Pakistan’s 224, and the match was finely balanced.

Neither Rahul nor I had had a memorable series. I had scored 53 runs in three innings, he had made 39. This was the first series I was playing after getting married, and I wanted to score runs with Sailaja looking on. Rahul and I chose the ideal stage to return to run-scoring ways. I began with a host of boundaries and quickly brought up my fifty, but this wasn’t to be one of our mega stands. We put on 131, which was crucial given the context. I was beginning to feel good about myself when I completely lost sight of a full toss from Shoaib Akhtar, who was operating with the second new ball. The sightscreen at the ground when batting from the pavilion end was very low, and I didn’t see the ball at all as it left Shoaib’s hand and clattered into my stumps. I stood open-mouthed at the manner in which I had been dismissed.

Rahul, however, kept batting on and on and on. He had made it a habit in the preceding four years of improving on his best Test score each time he got to a double hundred, and he stuck to that theme, stringing together good stands with almost everyone before being dismissed on the reverse sweep. By then, his 12-hour epic had yielded 270 of the finest, and with a lead of close to 400, we were on the cusp of history.

There was so much time left in the match that unless play was washed out for two full days, victory was guaranteed. We made things difficult for ourselves by dropping half a dozen catches on the fourth day, but the result wasn’t in any doubt. Bala was the pick of the bowlers, showing aggression while picking up three wickets, and Anil backed him up expertly with four wickets, running through the tail. Pakistan were rolled over for 245 and we ran out, resounding winners by the massive margin of an innings and 131 runs, even more comprehensive than the Multan triumph.

The huge smiles and unrestrained thumping of backs showed how much this 2–1 victory meant to each one of us, and to the group. We celebrated really hard, savouring a memorable series against a good Pakistan team in their own backyard, despite the distractions.

The results made the tour a success from every conceivable angle. We had won the hearts of the people with our conduct and our cricket, and Pakistan had bowled us over with its warmth and love. The respect we got from everyone we met is something I will treasure, always. Lahore was very similar to New Delhi; it is one of the most inclusive cities I have visited. We went to the Pakistani side of the Wagah border, and all of us have pictures with one leg in Pakistan and one leg in our homeland. We made friends on the field, and off it too. We knew we were on to something special, but it wasn’t until we landed in Delhi that we realised just how much our victories meant to our country. On the flight back to Hyderabad after the grand reception in Delhi, I didn’t stop smiling or signing autographs. The whole of India was rejoicing in our victory, and it was humbling to have been a part of the team that put the smiles on the faces of our fellow citizens. It was then that I understood the true import of Indo-Pak cricket. Pakistan was our only overseas series win in three years. We had lost in Sri Lanka, the Caribbean and South Africa, but we had also drawn in Zimbabwe, England and Australia. The 2003–04 season had gone particularly well, and with a string of home Tests ahead in the season to follow, the next year should have driven us forward. Instead, the exact opposite transpired. We didn’t just stagnate, we regressed. Just like that.

After a long off-season and with a new selection committee having been installed, our first challenge was against Australia, in October–November 2004. The Aussies came well prepared, drawing both from their experiences in 2001 and from the strategies adopted by Nasser Hussain later in 2001 when England had toured India. In a dramatic shift from their aggressive mindset, Australia appealed to our egos by falling back on the defensive. They worked out plans to frustrate us by cutting out the boundaries, and we played right into their hands. To begin with, there was inconsistency in selection; a couple of Tests after his century in Lahore, Yuvi was asked to open the batting and Mohammad Kaif was recalled to the middle order. Yuvi wasn’t given enough time to establish his credentials as an opener, and all of a sudden, there was a sense of insecurity with people starting to play for their places. Team goals inevitably took a hit in the climate of uncertainty, and it was no surprise that we lost the opening Test to Australia in Bangalore.

We were in for a shock when, after rain perhaps robbed us of a serieslevelling win in Chennai, an absolute green top welcomed us in Nagpur.

Australia had a distinct advantage even before the start of the Test. Sourav couldn’t play because of a leg injury, and Sachin had just returned after his first tryst with a tennis elbow. We had disintegrated from being a team to a collection of individuals, our shared goals lying in a heap of rubble that was the result of insecurity stemming from the inconsistencies in selection, the total lack of transparency and utter breakdown of channels of communication.

Australia rode on the unexpected Nagpur gift to score their first series win in India in three-and-a-half decades. It was a shattering result at the start of the season, especially as we had been tamed in our own backyard. No matter what the circumstances, we should not have lost. So when we went to the Wankhede Stadium, we had plenty to play for.

Personally, I had hit a trough after the highs of the previous season. The runs had dried up, and I suspected I would be in the firing line if I didn’t make runs in Mumbai. That we were confronted by the most treacherous surface of my career when we arrived at Wankhede didn’t do anything for my confidence. Balls were exploding off a length, hitting batsmen sharply on the chest and the ribs. If you were a batsman, you weren’t wrong in thinking that it wouldn’t be long before a ball came at you with your name on it.

We were shot out for 104 in the first innings, of which I made just one. Australia opened up a lead of 99, which should have been decisive on that minefield, and we went to stumps on five without loss at the end of day two. Sailaja was scheduled to fly back to Hyderabad that evening, and had left for the airport by the time I returned to my room.

I was dangerously close to a breakdown when I spotted a folder on my bed, inside which was a letter from Sailaja. She knew that I wasn’t feeling on top of the world, and intended to lift me with her words, if not her presence. It was a touching letter. She had intuitively sensed my discomfort and dejection. She ended the note with the words, ‘No matter what happens from here, you have plenty to be proud of. And I will always be proud of you.’

It took me a while to regain my composure, and I promised myself that I wouldn’t let Sailaja down. I called John and informed him that I wanted extra batting before the start of the third day. We went to the ground much before the rest of the team, and I batted for 30 minutes against the assortment of net bowlers John had assembled. I was extremely scratchy; my mind was clouded, my thoughts drifting to my current predicament and the dangerous track that lay in wait.

The longer I batted, however, the better I felt. Hitting a lot of balls in the nets when not in a good space was my trusted method to rediscover my touch and slowly get my feel back. The better the feel, the better the rhythm in my movements, in my timing. When I left the nets after thanking the bowlers, I felt I was as ready as I could be under the circumstances.

I was slotted in at No. 3 in the second dig, and I found myself walking out after the day’s third ball when McGrath dismissed Gautam Gambhir, the debutant. Viru fell, also to McGrath, with only 14 on the board. An early finish loomed.

Sachin arrived with a simple message—be positive. Whenever I batted  with Sachin, it was like having a coach at the other end. He loved to chat, second-guessing the bowlers and making counter-plans. He said, ‘Lachi, we can’t just look to survive on this pitch. An unplayable ball is not far away, so let’s try and get a few before that. Whenever a scoring opportunity comes along, let’s take it, even if there is an element of risk. It is important to back yourself and play your shots.’

Encouraged by his attitude, I struck a couple of boundaries and he did likewise. That’s when I realised how much the Australians feared the possibility of the two of us taking the game away from them. From crowding us with closein fielders, Ricky Ponting opened up the field to cut off boundaries even though we were still well behind.

Sachin and I made the most of Nathan Hauritz’s inexperience. It is very difficult to bowl on a turner, especially when you are a young spinner not exposed to such conditions. The toughest ball to negotiate on a turning track is the one that goes straight through. We played a lot off the back foot. While the ball was gripping and turning, it was also sitting in the pitch. If it was pitched short, we had plenty of time to rock back and play the pull or the back-foot punch. I had played top-class spinners both in the Hyderabad nets and in domestic cricket, so I played horizontal bat shots freely off the back foot. When Hauritz over-corrected and pitched the ball too full, Sachin played the sweep while I used the crease to manoeuvre the ball. Sachin was the more aggressive until he was dismissed for 55 after we had added 91. I struck plenty of boundaries, 12 in all, between long bouts of watchfulness, batting more than three hours in compiling 69 of the toughest, most satisfying runs of my life. It took a brilliant catch by Hauritz, diving to his left on his follow-through, to get rid of me. As I walked back, I told myself that even if it was not a hundred, this was one of my best Test knocks. Even discounting my state of mind, it had come against the formidable Aussies on a dangerous track, with our backs to the wall. I had also overcome the mental battle—bat for my place versus score runs for the team—and delivered under pressure, whether it was self-imposed or external.

The value of our partnership was put into perspective when we lost our last six wickets for just 23, exploding any suspicion that the pitch had eased out. Australia’s target was a mere 107, but the mood in our camp was positive. Everyone was charged up. We were going to fight it out. We had the runs on the board, they still had to make them. We had three high-class spinners in Anil, Bhajji and Murali Kartik, and knew that if Michael Clarke could take six wickets against us, we had the skill to exploit the conditions as well, if not better. We expected Australia to come hard at us, more so because they didn’t have too many batsmen with a good defensive technique for these conditions. Rahul pulled off a masterstroke by bringing Kartik on before Anil, and the leftarm spinner rose magnificently to the occasion.

Kartik is one of the best spinners I have come across in any form of cricket, and I firmly believe that he should have played a lot more Test cricket and finished with loads more wickets. Just eight Tests and 24 wickets is no reflection of his skills. He foxed the Australians using the arm-ball—which hastens through on pitching and doesn’t deviate off the surface—to devastating effect. I didn’t encounter a left-arm spinner with a better arm-ball all through my career. That evening, Kartik was aggressive, and his control over his length immaculate.

Buoyed by Anil’s words of encouragement, Kartik outwitted Ponting, Damien Martyn and Clarke in no time. He was a fierce competitor who, like Anil and Bhajji, had the temperament of a fast bowler. He was always up for a fight, aggressive and constantly looking for wickets. He also had the skills to back that attitude. It’s a shame that after his Mumbai heroics, he played only one more Test match.

Kartik’s three-wicket haul and Bhajji’s decimation of the tail sent Australia plummeting to 93 all out. We had something to show at long last, a thrilling 13- run win that temporarily masked the growing discontent and insecurity within the group.

Later in the year, we got the better of South Africa with 1–0 in a two-Test home series, also in November, and were too strong for Bangladesh away in December 2004, but there was no joy in winning. We were merely going through the motions, each man for himself and each man to himself. 

It was in this fragmented state that we took on Pakistan in the return series. We were expected to win—our fans were willing to overlook the Australian series as just one of those things—and we felt the weight of their expectations. We were well positioned to win the first Test in Mohali until a flat-as-a-pancake final-day surface and staunch resistance from Kamran Akmal and Abdul Razzaq denied us victory. Rahul’s century in each innings gave us the lead in Kolkata, but we were routed in Bangalore despite a wonderful double century by Viru. This was the season when, with Australia, South Africa and Pakistan visiting us, we had the glorious opportunity to further our ambition of becoming the best in the world. Instead, we lost one, won one, and drew the third series, which was definitely not acceptable.

As the season unfolded, I could clearly see John becoming more and more disillusioned. He was still committed to his task and his intensity did not drop, but each day, his heart was a little less in it. It pained me to see him in such turmoil. There was nothing I would not have done for him. He is a lovely man and gave everything he had to Indian cricket. In his last year, I don’t think Indian cricket reciprocated.

John’s contract was coming to an end at the conclusion of the one-dayers against Pakistan—by now, I had again become superfluous to the limited-overs side—and after the Bangalore defeat, he drew me aside to tell me that he had no intention of seeking an extension. John was the catalyst behind India being among the world leaders, and I wanted to shake him violently and ask him to stay back. But I knew what he had been through, and I took in his words with the utmost sadness. I had gotten used to his idiosyncrasies and his eccentricities, just as I had become a fan of his supreme dedication to what was more than just a job for him.

The 2004–05 season had started with a stable core. By the end of it, instability had taken deep root. In a matter of four series, we had slipped several rungs in all aspects. Much of that flowed from what happened in boardrooms and selection committee meetings, more off-field stuff than on it. It was, in hindsight, the ideal precursor to the tumultuous days under Greg Chappell, our next coach.

I had been a huge fan of Greg Chappell for a very long time. I had admired his presence at the crease in photographs and videos of him—elegant, almost majestic. Tall and upright, he struck the ball beautifully and had wonderful hands, especially when he fielded in the slips. Over the years, I was also impressed by his reading and understanding of the game. During my two interactions with him long before he took charge as our coach, I had come away with my knowledge enhanced and my respect for him multiplied.

When Greg was named as John’s successor, I was both happy and excited. It wasn’t until the formal announcement that we knew for sure that Greg would be our new coach. In those days, the players weren’t asked to express their views, and we didn’t. But just like everyone within the group knew that Rahul had been very keen on having John as the coach in 2000 and got Sourav to agree, we all got the sense that Sourav was eager to have Greg as the coach. He had spent time with Greg in Sydney before our tour of Australia in 2003–04 and benefited from those sessions.

I looked forward to feeding off Greg’s knowledge and his vast reservoir of expertise. I had idolised him from when I was a kid. There was a photograph of Greg wielding his Grey-Nicolls bat pasted on my father’s almirah, and since my uncle was a big fan too, it was natural that I followed suit.

Given where Indian cricket was at when John parted ways with us, it was imperative that we had a strong, respected individual who could lift the morale of the team and dispel the clouds of uncertainty hovering over our heads. We had made a lot of progress as a unit in 2003–04, but I for one felt that we had not been allowed to build on that in the season that followed. For various reasons, none of them cricketing, we had been reduced to a house divided. People were looking over their shoulders and above their heads, wondering when the axe would fall. I truly believed that Greg would be a player’s coach, that he would restore our spirits and confidence, and put back on track our faltering campaign to become the best in the world.

During the summer of 2005, I went to England to play club cricket for Lashings. Retired and current cricketers played alongside celebrities to raise funds. Among my teammates that year was Greg Blewett, the Australian batsman. When news broke of Greg Chappell’s appointment, Blewett told me that I needed to be careful with Greg. That we as a team needed to be careful around our new coach. He must have noticed the shocked look on my face, because he quickly explained that he was speaking from experience. Greg had been the coach of South Australia when Blewett played for the state, he said, adding that the former Australian captain had created a lot of instability within the team. Apparently, when Greg was the coach, the dressing-room atmosphere had been far from ideal. I didn’t take Blewett seriously. I thought he was just letting off steam.

I believed that Greg was the ideal person to help me take my game to the next level. I was about to enter my tenth year as an India cricketer, and I wanted to contribute more consistently to the team’s cause. I also thought that having a coach who understood batting as well as Greg did was a massive plus, not just for me but for our batting unit as a whole.

Our first formal introduction to our new coach was at a camp in Bangalore, ahead of a triangular one-day tournament in Sri Lanka. Greg was there with Ian Fraser, his assistant, and it was a camp that was uniquely different. There was cricket, but not just cricket. Greg introduced us to various other aspects, one of the more interesting ones being the de Bono method of lateral thinking, with the six hats and the works. You could sense that he was going to be a little innovative, not afraid to introduce us to concepts we hadn’t heard of. From the skills point of view as well, it was a very good camp and even though there hadn’t been a great deal of emphasis on the tactical elements, we all left the camp energised and optimistic that the season ahead would be fruitful. My struggles with the 50-over format continued in Sri Lanka, this time not helped by back spasms, which had become something of a constant companion. I was in a lot of pain and with my movements restricted, I missed the first two games. I played the next two with limited success, and was dropped for the final. When we reached Sri Lanka for the tri-series, Greg had his first one-on-one with me. He wanted me to play my natural game, to play aggressively. He told me that I was a very important member of the side.

The instability in the team environment was in some ways because of a new selection panel, and Sourav himself was under pressure because he was not scoring as many runs as he would have loved to as captain. I felt that with Greg coming in, I would get a fair chance to establish myself. I hoped that someone of Greg’s stature would not allow a repeat of the 2004–05 season.

I do regret being the quiet, non-pushy guy who took everything in his stride, without complaint. That’s something I realised post-retirement. But my parents had taught me never to beg for or demand anything. They held the view that if the team needed me, they would seek me out. But I now feel that may not be the right approach. If you feel something is unfair, you must question the process. People felt they could take liberties with me, and when I unprotestingly allowed them to, they were quick to jump on me.

I did, however, quickly realise, like a majority of my teammates, that Greg wasn’t quite the messiah Indian cricket was looking for. We did produce the results, undoubtedly. Our 50-over team won a record 16 consecutive ODIs while chasing, we scored our first Test win in South Africa, we won a series in the Caribbean for the first time in 35 years. Apart from the unforgettable heartbreak of the first-round elimination from the 2007 World Cup—and it hurts me even today, though I wasn’t a part of the squad—we strung together a fairly good run in both Tests and ODIs, but I must stress that the results were less due to the coach and more due to the players.

It’s not as if my teammates and I are determined to paint Greg as an evil monster. As I have already said, I was among those most delighted at being presented with an opportunity to work alongside and under him, but it didn’t take long for our respect to dissipate because of Greg’s attitude and approach. He was brusque and abrasive, highly opinionated and rigid in his thinking. His manmanagement skills were non-existent. He quickly sowed further seeds of discontent in an already diffident team.

I have heard it said that we ‘seniors’ didn’t take kindly to being ‘ordered around’ by Greg. That we couldn’t digest the fact that he didn’t treat us any differently from those who had just broken into the side. I would say that’s a figment of someone’s creative imagination. If we had misgivings when it came to Greg—and we did have plenty, yes—it wasn’t because of our egos. We never felt we were bigger than the game. I can certainly speak for myself, and I will say this much—Greg sent out conflicting signals, treating me with a callousness that I found shockingly unacceptable. I will always respect Greg Chappell the batsman. Unfortunately, I can’t say the same for Greg Chappell the coach. Sri Lanka had been an exploratory exercise. Next up was Zimbabwe for a triangular series, with New Zealand as the third team, to be followed by a two- Test series against the hosts. It should have been a gentle initiation. After all, Zimbabwe were at that time an inexperienced side who had lost their top players for one reason or the other, and were, with all due respect, in no position to even stretch us.

I landed in Harare ahead of our only practice game before the first Test in Bulawayo. This warm-up match was in Mutare, a small city we had never been to before. It was here that the chain of events that was to drive a wedge between friends and teammates kicked off, though as with most things, I was very much in the dark about what transpired in the background.

I got what I wanted out of the Mutare exercise, both during the warm-up game and at our net sessions that ran simultaneously. I was in a good mental space at the nets on the eve of the first Test when even I noticed some unusual bustle and activity to and from the middle. First, Sourav and Greg walked into the dressing room in the middle of our training, and a little later, Rahul joined them. They were engaged in an animated discussion, and it didn’t appear to be pleasant.

I was doing my cool-downs when Rahul returned to the ground, and I asked him what that little meeting had been about. Apparently, Greg had told Sourav that he didn’t fit into the playing eleven for the Test match. I was taken aback. After all, there were less than 24 hours to the game, and the Indian captain was being told that he didn’t deserve a place in the side. I didn’t know what to make of it because all I had was one basic piece of information, with no background and no knowledge of the nature of the discussion. It was all very strange, and quite obviously, Sourav wasn’t happy.

That evening, we had a meeting—just the players, without the support staff —and decided that no matter what, Sourav was our captain and he would play both Tests. That out of the way, we focused on game plans. We lost the toss but Zimbabwe didn’t make too many, and I found myself batting at close on day one.

I tried to put all the negativity of the past season out of my mind as I resumed my innings in Bulawayo. Out in the middle, it was tough going. However strong you are, it’s impossible to rid your mind of the uncertainty that’s hovering just beneath the surface. I put that aside to make a satisfying and dominating 140, and seemed on course for a double when I was run out after a misunderstanding with Sourav.

After a regulation victory, the team went to Victoria Falls—Greg had hopped across to Harare, the venue for the second Test—and you could cut the tension in our bus with a knife. No one could quite comprehend what was going on—the coach was targeting the captain at the very start of his tenure, and this after the captain had been primarily responsible for the coach landing the job. Too much had been said in public about the supposed fallout between Sourav and Greg, with all and sundry weighing in with their opinions. Several of us felt that it was important to sort out any issues that might have cropped up behind closed doors, not in full view of the team, which was gradually beginning to panic.

I had felt no delight at the Bulawayo hundred, but I was unprepared for what lay in store in Harare. We were fielding when I felt a bit of stiffness in my back. I came in to the dressing room for treatment, and Dheeraj Jadhav subbed for me in the slips. Having got a rubdown, I was waiting to return to the field at the end of the ongoing over when I spotted a piece of toast on a plate. There were four deliveries still to go, so I picked up the piece and was nibbling on it when Dheeraj put down a catch at slip.

Greg was furious, and directed his anger towards me. ‘Even if you were in pain, you should have stayed on in the middle,’ he thundered. ‘You come in, you are eating, and your replacement has put down a catch. In my book, he didn’t drop the catch, you did.’ I didn’t know whether to laugh or cry. It was so ridiculous. I understood that the coach sometimes had to crack the whip, but he also knew that I had come to get my back mobilised. The piece of toast hadn’t kept me in the dressing room any longer than was required. He was accusing me of shirking responsibility and also questioning my integrity. Not on, Greg. Any new coach comes with his own set of ideas and his vision for the team. We all understood that, and we never tried to compare what Greg was doing with what John had done. But increasingly, it was becoming hard not to. For one thing, the workload at training went up hugely, but it didn’t seem to come with any great planning. Under John, we had the option of not going for practice two days before a Test. On match eve, we would have a relatively light session so that the body was fresh going into the game. There was a scientific touch to our preparation, with a focus on hitting peak mental and physical fitness on the morning of the match.

With Greg, it was totally different. The workload increased a great deal, and we were made to take a lot more catches. We didn’t complain, but when we came back, we were informed of Greg’s unhappiness with our attitude and commitment, which he had expressed in an email sent to the BCCI. It looked like he wanted radical changes, and he wanted them yesterday. In the immediacy of our return from Zimbabwe, there was a review meeting, after which Sourav was removed as the skipper and axed from the ODI team, and Rahul was made the new captain. The way it happened was not harmonious, and surely not fair to a guy who had taken charge at a difficult time for Indian cricket and done an excellent job for more than five years. If the decision-makers felt that he was past his sell-by date, fine. But they could have handled the situation with greater tact and some common sense. Sourav deserved better—anyone in his place deserved to be treated with greater respect and empathy.

India played a string of ODIs at home against Sri Lanka, and then came the Test series. Chennai was a damp squib and when we went to New Delhi, I was asked to bat at No. 3 while Rahul, the skipper, opened in the first innings. I was pleasantly surprised to find myself at No. 3, and though I scored 69, I was disappointed at not converting a good start to a significant score. Sachin’s 35th Test hundred—he went past Sunny bhai’s record for the most Test tons—spurred us to victory.

When we went to Ahmedabad, illness forced Rahul to miss the match, for the very first time since he had donned the whites. With Sourav not in the side either, Viru took over as captain in Anil’s 100th Test, and I continued to bat at my favoured position. This time, on a track that demanded watchfulness more than blazing strokeplay, I found the right balance and produced a particularly pleasing hundred, my second in the last five Tests. Greg seemed elated after that knock, and I got the feeling he was starting to treat me differently. Until that knock, we had no more than a passing professional relationship. But post this match, Greg appeared to reach out to me to make me feel important, which I found somewhat strange.

Greg, I suspected, wanted me to bat at No. 3 because he felt I provided positivity and aggression in that position. He vociferously backed me to occupy that spot, and I couldn’t help but reflect on what John had told me in early 2001 —that he thought I was in the same league as Sachin, Rahul and Sourav. Until then, I had always been a soft target. John fought for me and stood by me for the better part of his tenure. With Greg pushing for me to bat at the spot I was most comfortable at, I felt that he was finally standing up for me and valued my presence in the team. Though, after what had happened with him in Harare, I was taking nothing for granted.

We went to Pakistan in early 2006 for what was to be a huge challenge for us and for our coach. The Lahore Test was badly hit by the weather, though there was time enough for Rahul, who was again opening, and Viru to stack up a 400- plus opening partnership. I faced exactly one delivery before the match was called off. After that stalemate, we went to dusty Faisalabad for the next Test. And it was there that I once again began to question the wisdom of our training methods.

The day before the Test, Fraser put us through a weird drill, taking us along an obstacle course as if we were preparing for a cross-country run and not a game of cricket. Predictably, my back flared up again because of the unusual rotation of the body. I was in serious pain, and was close to pulling out of the Test match. I said as much to Anil the evening before the game. Anil wasn’t amused. ‘You have to play, at any cost,’ he thundered, looking out for me more than for the team. He had seen from close quarters the treatment I had received from the successive think tanks, and he didn’t want me to sit out a Test match, even if it meant stretching my pain barrier.

Anil had been a friend and well-wisher, and I immediately bought into what he said. I am glad he goaded me into playing the match, because I made 90 and put on nearly 200 with Rahul, all this after Pakistan had rattled up close to 600. It wasn’t a free-flowing knock because I was clearly handicapped by the back injury. In trying to get to my hundred in a rush, I was caught behind off Danish Kaneria, the leg-spinner. I regretted that stroke because it set off a mini collapse, but then MS Dhoni and Irfan Pathan played wonderfully and counterattacked in style to earn us the first-innings lead and a respectable draw.

It was MS’s first Test hundred, but I knew even then that it wouldn’t be his last. I had first seen him during a four-day warm-up match in Bengaluru between the probables for the Australia Test series in October 2004. He came with a massive reputation. Javagal Srinath had seen him take the Pakistan A attack to the cleaners during a triangular series in Nairobi the previous year, and came back raving. Sri was taken not just by the runs MS made, but how cleanly he struck the ball and how fearlessly he took on the fastest bowlers. I was looking forward to seeing him bat, but he got out to a short ball without scoring. I felt for the youngster. I had wanted him to do well. It was, however, only a matter of time.

By the Faisalabad Test, MS had established himself in the ODI side, helped by a magnificent 148 against Pakistan in Visakhapatnam and a riotous unbeaten 183 against Sri Lanka in Jaipur, both in 2005. He had played only a handful of Test matches since his debut against Sri Lanka in December 2005, and this was his opportunity to show what he could do in the longer format. His 148 came off just 153 deliveries, dotted by towering sixes as he took on the Pakistani pacemen. Shoaib Akhtar was bowling particularly quickly, but MS dismantled him with spectacular pulls and cuts. He smashed the ball with plenty of power and quickly had the sparse local crowd rooting for him. When he returned to the dressing room after being stumped off Kaneria, he joked, ‘I am going to announce my retirement now! I never thought I would get a Test hundred. My dream has been fulfilled.’

MS didn’t come across as someone who was too ambitious. He seemed to enjoy every minute of being part of the team. We knew little about where he came from, or what hardships he had endured to get to where he had. Most youngsters breaking into the team are so busy trying to establish themselves that the fun element goes out of their cricket, and I say this from experience. MS was different. Whether he was batting, keeping wicket or at training, he had a ball. His room was an open house, the door open till past midnight. He was a big PlayStation freak, with a special liking for war games.

He was understandably shy when he broke into the team, but we got to know each other well because I stood in the slips and we had lots of conversations. What stood out was his balance and maturity as a human being. He understood the game really well, and his situational awareness was excellent. And he had plenty of self-belief. He was unorthodox as a wicketkeeper and batsman, but he didn’t succumb to pressure and try to be classical. He had a unique batting technique, and because he knew his game so well, he knew how to use it to score runs. At the end of the day, the most important thing was runs on the board. MS didn’t care if people thought he scored those runs prettily or otherwise.

As wicketkeeper, he was in the best position to judge what was happening off the surface, and it wasn’t long before the captain and the bowlers started to turn to him for suggestions. His biggest test behind the stumps came in the Wankhede Test against England in 2006. Anil was getting a lot of bounce off a length because of the red soil that constituted the surface, and MS had a difficult time gathering the ball. I was a little apprehensive as we had plenty of home Tests lined up and he would face a greater diet of the same. I need not have worried. In a matter of two months, he improved dramatically. He was a quick learner, and realised that going at the ball with hard hands wasn’t the right approach. He worked hard on getting his hands soft, and after Mumbai, his receiving of the ball became much better. With experience, he became outstanding to the spinners. I haven’t seen hands quicker than his when it comes to stumping.

MS didn’t overcomplicate things or work overmuch on his game. He didn’t believe in taking a thousand catches or hitting a lot of ball at nets. He is one of the naturally fittest cricketers I have played with or against, with a great love for football at warm-ups. His strength is his extraordinary mind, uncluttered and razor sharp.

MS and Irfan had given us the edge going into Karachi for the final Test, with the series still locked 0–0. We had played on two shirtfronts, but things changed dramatically in Karachi as Irfan produced a sensational first-over hattrick and we had Pakistan on the mat at 39 for 6 on the first morning. To slide from that position of strength to a 341-run hammering was a chastening, disheartening, incomprehensible experience. Mohammad Asif opened us up like a can of beans in both innings and I was clean bowled both times. That I had batted for an hour on both occasions and was yet undone by his prodigious seam movement was a tribute to his skill. Yuvi played a brilliant hand in the second innings and made one of the more spectacular hundreds overseas, but it was to no avail as we were well beaten. Back in Hyderabad, I enjoyed watching India easily win the one-day series that followed, but that hardly compensated for the Test defeat.

No sooner did the one-day team return home than England arrived in India for a three-Test series. In keeping with my yo-yoing fortunes, I was pushed down to No. 5 in Nagpur even though I had done little wrong at No. 3. Worse, there was no communication from the team management, no rationale behind the constant shuffling of the batting order. Matthew Hoggard was getting the ball to reverse a mile in the first innings, and I was trapped in front, first ball. It was also to be my last ball of the series.

Away we went to Mohali and, after practice the day before the second Test, Rahul came up to my room. He didn’t come bearing good news; he told me that I wouldn’t be playing the next day. Just as I was coming to terms with that, he said, ‘At some stage, this had to happen, Lax. This is the match.’ This had to happen? Really? After my 90 in Faisalabad, I had batted thrice in Test matches, making 19, 21 and 0. Certainly poor returns, but poor enough to be dropped? In the preceding seven Tests, in two of which I hardly batted, I had made two centuries and a 90. I had had enough experience of being dropped on a whim, but even for me, this was hard to digest. A couple of months ago, the coach was singing my praises and was determined to bat me at No. 3. Four Tests later, I found myself on the sidelines! This had to happen, Lax.

We won in Mohali and carried a 1–0 lead to Mumbai for the final Test. There too, I found myself on the bench as we continued to play five bowlers, and Yuvi played instead of me as the fifth batsman. Sitting in the dressing room as the match began, I picked up a copy of The Times of India which, coincidentally, carried the stats of Indian batsmen in Tests since Greg had taken over. If memory serves me right, I was No. 2 on that list. It was both reassuring and confusing. If that wasn’t good enough, then what was?

Such questions have a way of answering themselves reasonably quickly. Even as I was reading the paper, Greg came up to me and asked if I would open the batting in Tests going forward.

‘I made my decision in 2000, Greg. I will not open the batting in Test cricket, that is final.’

‘How old are you?’ he asked, totally out of context.

Surprised, I replied, ‘31.’

‘Don’t you think 31 is too young an age to be sitting at home? If you are not willing to open, you don’t fit into the playing eleven.’ I thrust the newspaper at him. ‘Since you took charge, this has been my performance,’ I said, my voice rising. ‘I am surprised you are talking to me like this.’

Greg stormed out without a word. He could have said something, anything. I looked at his receding back, and whatever respect I had for him dripped away rapidly. There was no consistency in his thoughts or his actions. From the Sourav incident in Zimbabwe to the way he spoke to me in Harare, and now this —you could make out his man-management skills were very, very poor, to the extent of being non-existent.

India’s first full season under Greg had been a roller coaster. It had started with the hope, if not the promise, of a better tomorrow, but by the end, we were no better off than at the beginning. Instead, the sense of insecurity had taken deeper root. There appeared to be different strokes for different folks, and even in private, conversations were guarded because it seemed as if the walls actually had ears. Of the four Test series we had played, we had defeated Zimbabwe and Sri Lanka, lost to Pakistan, and been held to a draw by England at home. The best Test side in the world? A long way from it.

The wonderful environs of the Caribbean were to help us usher in a fresh season as we hunkered down for a four-Test showdown. India hadn’t won a Test series in the West Indies since 1971, but we believed we had the side that could rewrite history. We needed to start the 2006–07 season well because also in the works was an away tour of South Africa later in the year. If we could seize our moments and pull off victories, we would be back on track.

Sachin wasn’t available for the Caribbean Tests because of injury, so Rahul dropped down to the No. 4 position and, after having been ignored for the two previous Tests at home, I was slotted back in at No. 3 for the first Test in St John’s, Antigua. The game of roulette continued unchecked.

I had what some might call a reasonable outing—29 and 31 in a drawn game that we should have won—but I looked at it as a failure. It wasn’t only because I set myself high standards. Each time I went out to bat, I felt I was playing for my place in the side. I was too keyed up, too demanding of myself, and it came as no surprise to even me that in the next game in Gros Islet, I was dismissed without scoring.

The day before the Gros Islet Test, we were introduced to another of the strange drills that were increasingly becoming commonplace. This one involved transferring the body weight, stretching fully forward and committing to the front foot totally, apparently to improve footwork. It was a mandatory session, and at the end of it, Greg told us that this was the way to play when the ball was pitched up, be it against fast bowlers or spinners. He was a stickler for batting according to the ‘book’.

Viru told him he couldn’t do it.

‘It’s not that I don’t want to do it, Greg, but I can’t take a long stride to the fast men, to Jerome Taylor or Pedro Collins. I would love to do it, and I would if I could, but I just can’t.’

Greg retorted, ‘You are rigid, you are unwilling to change.’ By then, Viru had scored runs all over the world against all attacks, and well, I rest my case. That duck in St Lucia was a great lesson for me. We were batting first after Rahul won the toss, and Viru and Wasim Jaffer got us off to a fantastic start. They batted on beyond lunch while putting on 159, and I batted each ball with them. I watched every single ball like a hawk, playing it in my mind because I was so anxious to get out there and make a contribution. When my chance eventually did come, I was moving as if I was already batting on 60 or 70— ponderous, tired. I was mentally drained at having lived out every ball, and the subconscious mind, of course, doesn’t realise the difference between virtual action and real action.

With my body fatigued—I had ‘scored’ 60–70 without actually having been on the field—and my mind jaded, my stint lasted a mere 10 deliveries. As I walked back, I promised myself that I would never again play an innings from the dressing room. After that fateful knock, I didn’t watch a lot of cricket while waiting for my chance to bat. I listened to music, I napped a bit, but I did not sit through the entirety of someone else’s innings. And it worked out quite well for me.

I was convinced that I had blown my chances, and that I would be dropped for the third Test in St Kitts. I had been in this situation before. After a couple of failures, all the doubts would come surging back. So I went into a cocoon, cutting myself off from the rest of the team and becoming a bit of a recluse. Not knowing if I would be playing the next day or not, I closed my eyes and relived my cricketing journey, like I had done in Sydney and on the car drive to Shirdi. That seemed to help, because not only did I play the Test, I also got a century. While I liked the runs I had got, I wasn’t happy with the manner in which I got them. The burden of getting that ton, and the way I got there, was far from ideal. It was a struggle all the way through, and I batted totally out of character. I didn’t enjoy the innings one bit. In other circumstances, it would have been branded a selfish innings and rightly so, but as it turned out, the team needed a knock of that nature because we were battling to avoid a follow-on. A little bit of the enjoyment had gone out of my game. I was now obsessed with the outcome. That wasn’t like me, and I didn’t like this new, scoreboard-focused Laxman.

We had dominated large pockets of the series and yet had nothing to show for our efforts when we got to Kingston for the final game, having drawn all of the previous ones. Sabina Park once carried the reputation of having the nastiest, spiciest pitch in the Caribbean, but this one was a bit of a lottery, up and down in nature right from the start. Rahul put on a wonderful exhibition in both innings, batting as if on a belter, while the rest of us struggled. I had the best seat in the ground on the first morning as he and I added 31 painstaking runs. His bat looked broader than all of ours put together, his feet moved beautifully, and he played the ball so late that he could make any adjustments as and when it misbehaved, which was quite often.

Most grounds in the Caribbean were undergoing a makeover with the World Cup a year away. Our makeshift dressing room at Sabina Park was square of the playing surface, and Viru, Yuvi and I sat there watching Rahul’s magic. As Collins let it rip, Rahul got his left foot fully forward and drove beautifully through the covers. We were oohing and aahing when Greg surfaced out of nowhere.

‘Now, guys, that is the way to bat, foot fully forward to the pitch of the ball. Not the way all you guys bat.’

As out of the blue as that was, it took every bit of self-control for the three of us to not burst out laughing. It would have been distressing had we allowed it to be, but we chose to see the humour in that comment, if only to maintain our sanity. Rahul’s twin gems, Anil’s defiance with the bat in the first innings, Bhajji’s five-for in the first and Anil’s six-for in the second drove us to a 49-run victory, which we celebrated with gusto. A long drought in the Caribbean had been broken in style and temporarily, the gloom lifted. We were back on the winning track, and the team looked a happy bunch because that’s what victory does to you. It didn’t mean all was well once more. For the time being, we chose to forget the negatives and celebrate our success.

The 2007 World Cup was only a few months away, and between the end of the Test series in the Caribbean and the 50-over extravaganza, we had just one more Test outing lined up—in South Africa towards the end of the year. Rahul’s boys geared up for the World Cup with a tri-nation tournament in Kuala Lumpur, followed by the Champions Trophy at home. The results were mixed but the core group was in place for the World Cup. Only the final preparations needed to be put in place. Or so everyone believed, until the tour of South Africa, when things unravelled quickly.

I had followed the fortunes of my friends and teammates with close interest, though with my first-class season having started, I wasn’t exactly in touch with them. Then, out of nowhere, in keeping with the trend at the time, I was named the vice-captain of the Test team. The news had just about sunk in when the selectors threw me another curveball. Some 16 months after I had last played an ODI, I was asked to join the Indian team for the final match of the series in South Africa.

Me? Really? That was my first thought when I got the call to head over to Johannesburg, and from there to Centurion. What made the decision even more baffling was that India had already lost the series, and the last match was largely of academic interest. How, after so long in the wilderness, I had suddenly become a one-day saviour, I couldn’t fathom. I still can’t, after all these years. I reached Pretoria the day before the game, and joined the afternoon training session. Maybe it was because the team had played badly, but I had never seen a more disjointed dressing room. When the session started, it was clear that different yardsticks for different people were still in vogue. One lefthanded batsman received throw-downs for almost half an hour, the other was dismissed after the cursory one bucket of balls was gone through. Everyone was on tenterhooks, and the mood was contagious; I felt an unseen weight pressing down on me.

For all the time spent journeying from Hyderabad to Centurion, my batting stint lasted exactly one ball, an away swinger from Shaun Pollock that I followed to first slip. It was my last appearance in coloured clothing for the Indian team, which I suspected even as I was making the long walk back to the pavilion, and my score mirrored my debut—a nought.

Chastened, we headed to Potchefstroom for our only three-day game before the Test series. Rahul had broken a finger midway through the one-day series and sat out the game, so I was the designated captain. Sourav had been recalled to the Test side after being dropped for the West Indies series, and that was another baffling decision because it wasn’t as if, in the interim, he had broken the door down with a string of big scores in domestic cricket. His return was another knee-jerk reaction to our dismal display in the limited-overs games in South Africa. But I believe justice was done because Sourav ought not to have been dropped in the first place.

On match eve, the players got together for a team meeting, and everyone was allowed his say. It was important to explode the air of melancholy and, as the evening wore on, we shed our inhibitions and expressed our apprehensions, fears, goals, dreams and desires. Collectively, we decided not to let Greg dictate our moods. We were the guys in the team, we had to take responsibility for what happened in the middle. There was no point nitpicking and finding fault with the rest of the world. We would leave nothing to chance on the park. Everyone was on the same page, and that showed as we overwhelmed the strong team put out by the hosts.

The mood was upbeat as we got to Johannesburg for the first Test, our first five-day match in five-and-a-half months. On a demanding pitch and against a very good South African attack, I played decently in the first innings, but Sourav was the star as he marked his comeback with an excellent half-century. Sourav has always had a sense of occasion and, with the entire country watching and backing him, he made a statement straightaway. That lifted our spirits, and Sreesanth then got into the act with one of the finest spells of fast bowling I have seen from an Indian quick.

I have always had a lot of time for Sreesanth the bowler. His excellent wrist position allowed him to deliver the ball with the most upright of seams, and he effortlessly swung the ball away from the right-handed batsmen, fairly late at that. In Johannesburg, he landed the ball on a spot time after time, carving through the South Africans with ridiculous ease. Standing at slip, I was delighted to watch such a wonderful exhibition of bowling, and prepared for every ball to nestle in my hands off the outside edge. Our 249 appeared a mountain as South Africa were shot out for 84. Armed with a massive lead of 165, we fancied our chances of a maiden Test win in the land of the Protea.

By stumps on the second evening, we had extended that lead to 309 but had lost five wickets along the way. We still had a distinct edge, but we were down to the last specialist pair and at 146 for 5, a fair amount of work lay ahead of myself and MS the following morning. I had batted freely to reach 42, striking the ball beautifully, and looked forward to a big one.

I must digress here just a bit to say that throughout my career, I was among the last men to board the team bus, but I was never late. If we were to depart at 8.30 a.m., I would get in with five seconds to spare. It just worked out that way. It wasn’t a routine or a superstition.

So it was on the third day, as Sreesanth and I came down the escalator at Sandton Sun. We were some 15 steps away from the bus and, by my estimation, there was at least a minute, if not more, to the official departure time. Imagine our consternation when the bus peeled away from the parking bay and drove off, leaving the two of us behind. For a second, I thought it was one of those practical jokes you sometimes play to lighten the mood. But the bus didn’t stop, and no heads popped out of the windows grinning wickedly. Sreesanth and I had been abandoned, left to fend for ourselves. I was one of the overnight batsmen, Sreesanth had yet to bat and clearly would have a big role to play with the ball. I could feel the anger build inside me. Sreesanth was confused more than anything else, but I was seething. We requested the concierge to find us a cab, and made the four-kilometre trip from the hotel to the ground in silence. Peakhour traffic and the resultant snarls added to the darkness of my mood, and to make matters worse, the security at the stadium wouldn’t allow us in because we didn’t have any identification on us to prove that we were who we claimed we were. After all, what sane person would expect a batsman about to resume his innings to arrive at the ground in a cab?

Eventually, we were escorted to our dressing room and I blew my top. It takes a lot to get me riled up, but this was it, and I had a royal go at Rahul and Greg. I said I knew I was on time for the bus, but even if I was a few seconds late, so what? What does common sense say? That you leave an overnight batsman behind, or make sure that he is in a good frame of mind with a Test match on the line? I asked Rahul how he had silently acquiesced. ‘How did you allow this to happen?’ I half-screamed. Neither man had an answer. What could they say, in any case?

Fortunately, by the time I crossed the line alongside MS, I managed to put  the episode out of my mind. MS and Anil were dismissed cheaply, which meant the responsibility on my shoulders magnified. I have always enjoyed batting with the bowlers—I don’t fancy the word tailenders—and this time, I had Zak for company. Aware that each run scored was an extra run that he would have to attack the South Africans with, Zak put his head down and batted beautifully. Our partnership of 70 gave us an overall lead of 401, and the cushion that we were so desperately looking for. I rate that 73 among my better knocks, for the circumstances under which it was made and for the fact that it helped us secure one of our more celebrated wins overseas.

Zak and Sreesanth were excellent once again, and Anil weighed in with three wickets as we won handsomely on the fourth afternoon. Some might say, against all odds. We celebrated wildly in the dressing room, pent up emotions finding a release. We first turned our attention to the champagne that had been brought in, pouring it on Rahul and on each other. Once we ran out of champagne, we dived into the fridge and brought out bottles of Gatorade stacked there, spraying that around. No one was spared, and no one—players, members of the support staff or our local liaison officer—stayed away either. After Gatorade, we hurled yoghurt, then someone brought a bucketful of water from the rest room as the mayhem continued.

In the end, it all became very messy, I must confess, and we were rightly slapped with a fine for causing damage to the ceiling and floor of the dressing room. As we reached the hotel, we acknowledged that we had gone overboard,  but the celebration had been worth the fine!

As in the past, we went from the high of victory to the debilitating low of defeat in the space of a week, well beaten in Durban. I made an unbeaten 50 in the first innings as wickets tumbled around me and the South Africans dished out the short stuff. I fought it out for four-and-a-half hours and kept out 156 deliveries, and felt reasonably happy when I walked back, only for Greg to immediately accost me and tell me that I had batted too slowly. We had been shot out for 240, I was one of only two half-centurions, I had come back undefeated, and the coach was telling me that I had batted very slowly and allowed the opposition bowlers to get on top of us. Good for morale, Greg! More disappointment was in store in the final Test when we failed to build on a handy first-innings advantage and ended up losing by five wickets. From 90 for two in the second innings, we were bowled out for 169, casually throwing away a glorious chance to tighten the screws on South Africa. A tour that had begun with so much promise had ended in familiar disappointment on foreign shores. That was to be my last experience of Greg Chappell the coach. When we returned to India, there was a strong dose of one-day cricket with the World Cup imminent, but there was every indication that a disaster was waiting to unfold. The team was divided into two or three factions, and there was a serious trust deficit. The coach had his favourites, who were well looked after, while the others were left to fend for themselves. The team had disintegrated before our eyes.

The World Cup was an event to forget. Some of the players suggested to the board that they should go to the tournament without Greg, but the BCCI would have none of it. We sent out one of the best ever Indian one-day teams, and still didn’t advance beyond the first round. There were understandable repercussions, though it wasn’t until Sachin put his foot down that Greg’s tenure as coach came to an end.

I couldn’t help but recall Blewett’s warning in Lashings as Greg announced that he was stepping down. Greg’s entire stint had been cause for bitterness. He was rigid and inflexible in his approach, and didn’t know how to run an international team. He often seemed to forget that it was the players who played the game and were the stars, not the coach.

When we went to Australia the following season, Wasim Jaffer—a huge Greg Chappell fan—was watching videos of Greg’s batting and fielding on YouTube. Up popped Guru Greg Documentary, Part 1. And then Part 2, through to Part 6. From the day he arrived at the BCCI office on being appointed coach to his last day in office, when he attended the presser in Port of Spain, everything had been captured on tape, for posterity, as part of a commercial deal with ABC. Including Greg’s synopsis before going to tell Sachin that he would have to bat at No. 4 in the World Cup, and just before his final press conference, where he spoke of having to bear the brunt of criticism over the team’s poor performance. Greg Chappell arrived in India to a groundswell of goodwill and support. He left the team in tatters, having played an influential part in the worst phase of my playing career. Results on the field might suggest that his methods worked to some extent, but those results had nothing to do with our coach.

Six years had passed since our stated desire to become the best Test side in the world, but we were no closer to realising our dream due to a combination of factors. The gains until the last year of John’s tenure had long since disappeared, and we were a team only in the loosest possible sense. The 2007 World Cup debacle had incensed our fans; players’ effigies were burnt and their houses stoned. While we weren’t quite at our lowest ebb, we needed huge doses of positivity and an influx of good vibes to haul ourselves back on track. Our first opportunity to do so came not long after the World Cup, when we travelled to Bangladesh for a two-Test series. While efforts were underway to button down our next coach, the BCCI was not rushing into things. Chastened by the Greg Chappell experience, the board was determined to do its due diligence. An SOS went out to Ravi Shastri to help the team during this difficult time and as was typical, Ravi obliged.

While Ravi was named the cricket manager for the tour, the BCCI brought on board Venkatesh Prasad as the bowling coach and Robin Singh as the fielding coach. We had an all-Indian crew for the first time since 2000. Ravi was characteristically upbeat, while Venky and Robin ran the practice sessions meticulously and efficiently, like they would in England a little later in the year. We were clearly too strong for Bangladesh, but then again, we were in a no-win situation. No matter what had happened at the World Cup, we were expected to beat Bangladesh, so from an outsider’s perspective, it was no big deal. But for us as a team, it was not merely enough to get back to winning ways. To start to gel as a unit once again was an important, imperative process. I found myself on the bench through the two-Test series as we went in with five bowlers. We defeated Bangladesh 1–0, after the first match ended in a rain-affected draw. Each of our top four—Dinesh Karthik, Wasim Jaffer, Rahul and Sachin— made hundreds in the second Test, and Zak led the bowling charge with seven wickets for the match, facilitating a commanding innings win to restore confidence within the squad. Our next red-ball challenge would be in England, where we hadn’t won a series in 21 years. On our last tour there in 2002, we had done well to square a four-Test series 1–1, and we were determined to improve on that result. The wise and highly respected Chandu Borde accompanied us as the cricket manager, with Venky and Robin assisting him in their new-found capacities. The nets were run beautifully. Chandu sir kept an eagle eye on the proceedings but lightened things up with his dry sense of humour. Team meetings weren’t rambling affairs but crisp and to the point. Venky and Robin did the heavy physical lifting, but Chandu sir was clearly in control, effortlessly bridging the generation gap and showcasing awesome man-management abilities. No one even thought about what had happened six months earlier. Laughter and enjoyment made a welcome reappearance. We were all in a good state of mind, helped by a very open environment of give-and-take that resonated with each of us.

England were going to be a handful in their backyard, and we were soon up against them in the first Test at Lord’s. On the final day, even as dark clouds gathered above us, we found ourselves nine down despite a sterling defensive display from MS Dhoni. In a nail-biting finish, MS and Sreesanth held on for dear life to salvage a draw, aided by a huge slice of luck.

For long, we had held the view, not without basis, that Steve Bucknor had it in for us. The Jamaican is a great entertainer and a lovely man, but his decision-making often drove us up the wall. But that day, Steve emerged as our best friend as he ruled Sree not out when everyone at the ground—and that included our dressing room—believed he was plumb in front to Monty Panesar. We took it as a sign that the cricketing gods were on our side. We saved the Test as bad light stopped England’s march. That draw was as good as a win, because in a three-Test series, especially away from home, it is almost impossible to recover from going 0–1 down.

We had reverted to six batsmen, which meant I was back in action. I had a decent Test, but nothing earth-shattering, and went to Nottingham not so much desperate as eager to make a significant contribution. Zaheer bowled a wonderful spell on the first day to pack England off, and we then opened up a massive lead as five of us in the top six made half-centuries. Our lead was  closing in on 275 when Zak and I crossed paths—me on my way to the dressing room after edging Chris Tremlett to the keeper, he on his way to try and extend our advantage.

I am not sure what England were trying to achieve, but in their collective wisdom, they decided that it was all right to rile Zak up. Suddenly, as if out of thin air, a few jelly beans surfaced near the batting crease. The implication was that Zak had used illegal means to ‘make’ the ball in England’s first innings. Now, Zak is a fairly easy-going and laidback guy, but if you poke him, he will respond with ferocity. He was not happy about the message conveyed through the jelly beans, and let the English slip cordon know exactly what he thought of them.

Zak had spent the previous summer playing county cricket for Worcester, a stint that was to shape his legacy as a left-arm paceman. Until then, he had produced the occasional brilliant burst but was generally happy to go with the flow. Post the successful Worcester sojourn, he was a changed bowler, not just from the point of view of skill, but also from the way he approached his bowling. He had figured out when to attack, and when to take the foot off the throttle and string together maidens. He could also gauge the conditions well. If they suited him, he went flat out, but if there was no assistance, he focused on wonderful lines and impeccable lengths. He understood the importance of not leaking runs when the conditions were loaded in favour of the batsmen and nothing was happening off the surface. But the moment the clouds gathered, he was at the batsmen’s throats. He was in total control of his bowling, and fortunately for us, he was not ploughing a lone furrow.

RP Singh, the young left-arm quick from Uttar Pradesh, was also on top of his game. He had taken his maiden five-for at Lord’s, and stepped up admirably at Trent Bridge to play a fine second fiddle to Zak, so even though Sreesanth was off the boil, there was no let-up in the pressure on England.

England had stirred the sleeping giant, and Zak produced his second peachy spell of the Test in the second innings, a telling 5 for 75. With Kevin Pietersen at the forefront, England batted much better, but every time they seemed to be edging ahead, Zak pulled them back. RP and Anil dealt crucial blows and we had only a small target to chase. We won comfortably with Rahul and Sourav seeing us home. For the first time since 1986, we had taken the lead in England and as we returned to London for the final Test at The Oval, we were optimistic about a repeat of the scoreline 21 years earlier: 2–0.

After Rahul won a handy toss, all of us made attractive runs. I had raced to 51 when greed got the better of me. MS then entertained the fans with a bruising 90-odd full of muscular strokeplay. But even though five of the top seven topped fifty and two got into the 90s, we were still searching for our first century-maker of the series.

That elusive hundred came from an unexpected quarter. Anil is no mug with the bat—he has five first-class hundreds—but few would have bet on him being the only centurion for India in an overseas series win. Anil took a lot of pride in his batting and nothing angered him more than throwing his wicket away. He wasn’t going to do it here, and every single one of us in the dressing room was praying that he got to three figures. His celebrations were predictably over the top. I don’t recall him hailing a bowling achievement, not even his 10- for at the Kotla, with the same enthusiasm. Anil is one of the toughest guys to have played the game. For him to get as emotional as he did on achieving a batting milestone that everyone, including perhaps himself, thought was beyond him at that stage of his career showed what it meant to him. The inner child in him found an outlet, and it led to much backslapping and sore hands in the hut. Despite a lead in excess of 300, we chose to bat on, which wasn’t a very popular decision with the media, but the flatness of the track became evident as England comfortably held on for a draw after being set an impossible 500 for victory. 2–0 would have been top stuff, but we were more than happy with 1–0, with winning a big overseas series in tough conditions, and bringing back the Pataudi Trophy. No. 1 no longer seemed out of reach.

I stayed back in England after the Test series even as Rahul and the boys were engaged in the one-dayers against the English. I had scored a county contract with Lancashire which, as it turned out, had a huge influence on my career. When you are playing for the country, and especially if you happen to be named VVS Laxman, you are always looking to score runs and retain your position in the eleven. You are so obsessed with winning matches that sometimes, the love for the game slips away unnoticed and you become almost machine-like in your approach. I was dangerously close to that predicament until Lancashire threw me a lifeline.

I enjoyed the experience of being an overseas pro and not having to worry about my place in the team. There were no extraneous factors to contend with— the whims of the selectors or the biases of the decision-makers. My entire stint there revolved around cricket, and I enjoyed it no end. Lancashire had given me a beautiful house, and Sailaja and Sarvajit came over to join me. The little fella was just about eight months old, and to come back to gurgles and cuddles in the evening was an experience like none other. Sailaja told me midway through my county commitments that she had never seen me happier playing cricket than during those seven weeks in Lancashire.

In a throwback to 2003, when a vacation to the United States following the disappointment of World Cup rejection rejuvenated me, this seven-week outing with Lancashire revived my love for cricket. The enjoyment crept back into my batting. Throughout your career, there are wake-up calls from time to time that you need to heed. I was fortunate, whether by accident or design, that I did precisely that, otherwise there might not have been much of a story to tell. Post a family holiday to the US after the county stint, I returned home for another demanding challenge—playing Pakistan in our own backyard towards the end of 2007. The matches were coming thick and fast; we had an away tour of Australia after the Pakistan series, followed by a three-Test series at home against South Africa. All the big boys lay in wait, and the possibilities were at once exciting and endless.

As a new-look team under MS was creating history at the inaugural World T20 in South Africa, Rahul stunned us all by giving up the captaincy. I had no inkling that he was planning to step down, though I could see that the first-round elimination from the World Cup in the West Indies had taken its toll on him. While we won the Test series, Rahul didn’t have a good time with the bat in England, where he had otherwise enjoyed himself and made loads of runs. Rahul the skipper was even more intense than Rahul the batsman. He took everyone’s failures to heart, and had started to feel that the captaincy was a burden, not a responsibility any longer. He told me much later that during the final stages of his captaincy, he had lost the enjoyment that came with batting, as had happened with Sachin when he was the skipper.

MS was made the full-time limited-overs captain, which was hardly a surprise because he had showcased his leadership skills at the World T20, but the selectors felt he should wait a little to be given charge of the Test team. Therefore, almost by default, Anil was named the skipper, more than 17 years after his India debut and with the sands of time fast running out for him. The captaincy was mere official affirmation of Anil’s role within our setup. Even when he was not the designated captain, Anil was always a leader within the group. When I made my debut in 1996, he was vice-captain to Sachin. In the intervening 11 years, Sourav, Rahul and Viru had led the Test side and Anil seemed to have permanently lost out. When he was eventually made the skipper, I was probably more delighted than he was.

Anil as a captain was precisely what you would expect him to be. His communication was spot-on, and it was very clear what he wanted from the team. He wanted Team India to play a certain way—fearlessly and with freedom. He said he knew his appointment was short-term, but he didn’t look at himself as merely warming the bench for MS. He urged us to express ourselves, but also be disciplined and behave like a professional unit. It was quintessential Anil, and we bought into it totally. He was a giant in the dressing room and never asked of you what he wouldn’t do himself. The respect we had for him was immense, and our delight at his elevation to the captaincy was genuine.

I received a fillip when Anil told me ahead of the first Test against Pakistan at the Kotla to not worry about my position. He had seen how often I had been shunted in and out of the team, and he put me at ease immediately. He and I had a very good equation going and to have the captain’s confidence and backing meant a great deal to me.

Chandu sir was replaced as the interim coach by Lalchand Rajput, who had been present in the same capacity when MS lifted the World T20 title in Johannesburg. By now, Venky and Robin had an excellent grip over things and eased Lalu into the task. From the way the two of them handled things in England, we realised that they felt we were senior enough and experienced enough to run the team by ourselves. They made sure our preparations were flawless, and provided us with an atmosphere full of fun and laughter. A tour of Australia was imminent: four Test matches that would show us where we stood as a travelling team, despite our successes over the previous 15 months in the Caribbean and England. By an unspoken agreement, there was no mention of our off-field travails of the previous two years. It was a fresh start, and with successive series wins away from home under our belt, we had rediscovered our mojo. But Anil couldn’t have asked for a more demanding foreign series in which to debut as the captain. But first, a serious challenge awaited us on our return to India—a series against Pakistan.

Even though we were playing Pakistan in a three-Test series for the fourth time in as many years, there was no dimming of tension, no lowering of expectations. The players got along with each other just fine, but none of us could be immune to what we knew our fans demanded of us. Having said that, it was probably the most low-key Indo–Pak series I was part of.

After my time with Lancashire, I was fresh and feeling good mentally. I felt in total control. I was hitting the ball nicely, to areas where I wanted it to go. We were in a slightly sticky spot in the first Test at the Kotla, before MS and I stroked half-centuries to give us a vital lead. The bowlers shot out Pakistan for a modest score the second time around and, with just over 200 needed for victory, our top order dug in to complete a straightforward victory. I was very impressed with how pressure-free we were. Anil’s reign had got off to the perfect start at his favourite venue.

The two remaining Tests fizzled out into tall-scoring draws on flat surfaces. There were plenty of runs to be had and we gorged ourselves. Wasim Jaffer, Irfan Pathan, Yuvi and I made hundreds, but the man who towered head and shoulders above us was Sourav.

From the time he had rejoined the Test team in Johannesburg in December 2006, Sourav was a batsman transformed. It was as if, being stripped of the captaincy had lifted a huge burden off him. Having been dropped off the team also seemed to have affected his cricket for the better somehow. He batted with a lot more freedom and a lot less pressure, and you could see that he was both relieved and content with himself. He felt more comfortable in the changing room, and I am sure Anil had something to do with it. You knew with Anil that he meant what he said, that he wouldn’t sugar-coat anything or say stuff to make you feel better. If he told you that he was in your corner, he was. No two ways about it.

Even in England, and especially in Nottingham, Sourav had batted beautifully. Now back in India, not only was he on top of his game, he was also enjoying being one of the boys again. Divested of the responsibilities of captaincy and with plenty of time and energy to focus on his own game, he was back to livening up the dressing room, cracking jokes and pulling someone or the other’s leg.

All of this reflected in his batting. In the second Test, he made his only Test century at his beloved Eden Gardens, and in the next game in Bangalore, he registered his sole double hundred. We had been in trouble on the first morning, the only time there had been some joy for the bowlers. I remember Yasir Arafat getting the ball to go, and we lost four wickets in no time when Sourav and Yuvi joined hands. Yuvi’s was a wonderful innings, especially given the situation we were in. We were 61 for 4 when he strode out, and he fairly hammered the bowling, though Sourav held his own as the two stylish left-handers entertained the dressing room as well as their fans.

As the pitch became slower and slower, prising the opposition batsmen out was proving impossible. The consummate battler and canny thinker that he is, Anil nearly bowled us to victory as he turned to medium pace and picked up five wickets in the second innings, but Pakistan held on for dear life to scramble to safe shores. We would have loved to have a more impressive score line than 1–0, but defeating a formidable Pakistan team by any margin anywhere in the world was an achievement to savour.

And so, with a hat-trick of series wins to our credit, away we went to Australia in December 2007. Lalu was still in charge as our cricket manager/interim coach, with Venky and Robin as bowling and fielding coaches. We felt we were ideally placed to score our first series win Down Under. 2003– 04 was an opportunity missed, and we didn’t want to leave anything to chance in 2007–08, in what could be the last Australian outing for some of us older players.

We had just one practice game in Melbourne before the first Test, and even though our preparations were hampered by rain, we weren’t unduly perturbed. Our spirits received a further boost when we turned up for our first practice session at the iconic MCG, ahead of the Boxing Day Test. The pitch was as subcontinental as we could expect, and even though we lost the toss and saw Phil Jaques and Matt Hayden put on a century opening stand, we fought back well to bowl Australia out for 343.

But then, inexplicably, our batting went to pieces against the discipline of the Australian bowlers. The slow surface went against us and apart from Sachin, no one looked to have its measure. We conceded a huge lead, and Australia piled on the runs and set us a target of nearly 500. We were shot out for less than 200 for the second time in the match. To be crushed by 337 runs was a massive blow to our pride, but Anil was quick to point out that it was one bad match. The result didn’t make us a bad team.

Somewhat chastened but also pumped up, we went into the New Year Test at the SCG with a point to prove. The four days between the Tests had allowed us to introspect and understand that the margin was not indicative of the difference between the sides. We had played poorly, well below our potential. Sydney offered us an immediate chance to redeem ourselves.

However, things went as pear-shaped as one could imagine. With RP bowling exceptionally, we made deep inroads into the top order and had Australia on the mat at 134 for 6. RP then induced a huge nick off Andrew Symonds, which was gobbled up by MS, but to our astonishment, Bucknor ruled him not out. It was a decision that was to play a major part in the outcome of the game. It was also the first of a series of poor decisions we got while fielding and batting.

Andrew went on to smash an unbeaten 162, and shared useful stands with Brad Hogg and Brett Lee to haul Australia past the 450-mark. We also cashed in on the very good batting conditions. In order to accommodate the in-form Yuvraj, Rahul was forced to open the batting; Anil had fought for Viru’s inclusion in the touring squad but couldn’t accommodate him in the eleven. Rahul made a patient fifty, I scored a century, and Sachin held our innings together.

We lost Wasim to the new ball, and had only eight on the board when I joined Rahul in the middle, walking a bit gingerly.

Like on our previous tour, the lot of us had gone to Darling Harbour on New Year’s Eve to enjoy the fireworks, but on our way back, we hadn’t been able to secure transport. The hotel wasn’t far away and we didn’t have any choice as such, so we had decided to walk back. I was a wearing a new pair of shoes, and the inside of the shoe chafed the skin near the Achilles tendon on my right foot. The skin peeled off and left a burning sensation. The next morning, a doctor had covered the injury with a patch used for small first-degree burns.

Fielding for eight hours had made the pain worse. I gritted my teeth and donned my game face, but my walk gave me away. Andrew Symonds charged in from the covers and told his mates loudly enough for me to hear, ‘Look at the way  he is moving, it’s like a nail has been hammered into the foot.’ I agreed inwardly. That was exactly how I felt.

Once I took guard, though, I forgot about the pain. I made a conscious effort to keep my mind blank, and because I wasn’t able to run freely, I chose to play my shots from the start. Brett Lee was quick, but Australia’s insistence on attack opened up enough gaps for me to exploit. Because of my previous successes at the SCG, I went in with confidence. That, and a quick outfield, contributed to the succession of boundaries that flowed off my bat. Rahul, at the other end, was not as fluent. He batted for a long time, but never looked in control. It was as if the two of us were batting on different surfaces, against different attacks. There was one phase when Rahul was scoreless for an hour. When he finally got a single, the crowd rose to its feet and mock-applauded him. Ever the sport, Rahul raised his bat to them with a sheepish grin!

I wasn’t adversely affected by his struggles, taking on Mitchell Johnson and Stuart Clark, though the shot I enjoyed the most came off Brett. He was bowling really fast, and pitched a ball just a little short of good length. Because I was seeing it so well and so quickly, I pulled him from my stance through midon. Usually, the faster the bowler, the squarer the pull goes. I was delighted to have hit him through mid-on; it told me that I was on top of my game. Rahul was dismissed not long after I reached my hundred, but even before he had sat down in the dressing room, I followed him out after a poor stroke. Having prided myself on sticking to my game plan, I paid the penalty for being overambitious. I wafted at Hogg away from my body and was caught at short cover, a terrible end to one of my more dominating and fulfilling Test innings. Sachin and Sourav added 108 after my fall but we suffered a middle-order wobble and were in trouble at 345 for 7. With Bhajji getting stuck into the Aussies, Sachin found another ally in our march towards the Australian total when all hell broke loose in the post-lunch session on day three. There was plenty of activity in the middle, and none of it involved bat or ball. Symonds and Bhajji exchanged words, and Sachin stepped in to broker peace. Matthew Hayden said his bit during the changeover at the end of the over, and soon Ricky Ponting joined the discussion. Umpires Bucknor and Mark Benson then got involved. Benson said something to Bhajji with his hand covering his mouth to avoid the possibility of lip-reading. Bhajji vehemently shook his head in denial. We were all bemused, not sure what was happening, but certain that whatever it was, it wasn’t pleasant.

Not until Sachin and Bhajji came in at tea did we understand what had transpired. Andrew had accused Bhajji of calling him a monkey (an unacceptable racial slur in these parts), and Bhajji insisted that he had said maaki, an expletive in Hindi. Our team manager Chetan Chauhan and Anil both asked Bhajji exactly what he had said. Bhajji stuck to his stand and Sachin backed him up, and that was good enough for us. But clearly, it wasn’t good enough for the opposition or the authorities because Bhajji was charged with breaching the Code of Conduct.

We tried our best to put this out of our minds as the Test resumed on the fourth day, but our 69-run lead disappeared in no time as Hayden laid into us. There was more disappointment in store as a slew of decisions went Australia’s way again. We were more angry than dispirited. At one level, we also felt a sense of persecution because we felt the odds were deliberately stacked against us, that we were not being allowed to compete on an equal footing.

Australia set us a target of 333, declaring just before lunch on the final day. We were never going to try to chase down the total, but felt reasonably secure. But we hadn’t bargained for further unkind cuts from various quarters. Rahul had batted with customary grit when Bucknor ruled him out caught behind. The gap between bat and ball was so huge that you could have driven a truck through it, but where everyone else saw the gap, Bucknor saw a nick.

Worse was to follow when Sourav was ruled out caught at second slip even though Michael Clarke caught the ball on the bounce. Before the series, Anil and Ricky had sat down and arrived at a gentleman’s agreement for these low catches. They concurred that the batsman would take the fielder’s word for it. If he said the catch was clean, the batsman would walk off and not bring the umpires into play. In this case, Clarke had clearly taken the ball after it bounced, yet both he and Ricky insisted that it was a clean catch. The umpire went by the fielder and the captain’s word and ruled Sourav out. Subsequent replays showed them in poor light.

We could and should still have saved the Test, as Anil led the way with his typical battler’s attitude. But with less than 10 minutes to the end of the match, we lost three wickets in Clarke’s only over to concede the game and play ourselves out of the reckoning for a series win. As if that wasn’t bad enough, after a hearing that continued into the wee hours of the morning, Mike Procter slapped a three-Test ban on Bhajji. The accusers had no proof to back their  accusations, yet their word seemed to carry more weight than ours. It was impossible to understand. We were all up in arms at this grave injustice. It wasn’t just a ban on Bhajji, it was a question mark against our character and integrity as a team.

More to get away from the madness of it all, we hit Bondi Beach in a bid to clear our minds and decide on a future course of action. But the media wouldn’t spare us. We were to travel to Canberra for a practice game between the second and third Tests, and most of us had boarded the bus, which was parked on the road just outside the hotel. Meanwhile, the team management and the BCCI were involved in hectic discussions. So elaborate and delicate were the talks that we remained in the bus for more than two-and-a-half hours, watching the recently released movie Welcome, starring Nana Patekar, Anil Kapoor and Akshay Kumar.

By the time the movie ended, a decision had been made—we would not be travelling as per schedule to Canberra, and would stay put in Sydney until further notice.

A lot of us were against the continuation of the tour, and I was among those who insisted that we should go back to India, given the circumstances. My contention was that the umpiring had been incompetent, possibly even biased, because every call went against us, and that the ban on Bhajji was both unfair and without basis.

Eventually, though, better sense prevailed and we didn’t abandon the tour. The BCCI would appeal the ban on Bhajji, and we would see out the tour, which included two further Tests and a triangular series with Sri Lanka as the third team. All this took time to sort out, so we didn’t reach Canberra until the evening before the match.

After the team had useful practice in a game for which I was rested, we reached Perth for the third Test. The Australians were gung-ho, because they felt that the two Tests they had won had been played in ‘Indian’ conditions, and that Perth would throw up as Australian a surface as you could expect. But we weren’t slouching either. We wanted to go out and play for Bhajji, we wanted to prove a point. We weren’t there to make up the numbers, and Anil reminded us that Perth was our best chance to show Australia and the world what we were made of.

We made a couple of crucial changes, with Viru coming into the eleven, Rahul dropping down to No. 3 and me batting at No. 6. All of these moves played a significant part in the end result. Viru made crucial, aggressive, temposetting runs, Rahul looked at his most fluent, and I came up with another of my second-innings fifties that gave us the cushion with which the bowlers could attack Australia.

I did my reputation of getting the bowlers to bat above themselves no harm by engaging in a 51-run stand with RP for the eighth wicket, which helped us extend our lead beyond 400. This was on day three. The previous day, Gary Kirsten had joined the team in a consultancy role. He had been appointed our coach but wouldn’t take charge of the team until our next series at home, interestingly against his country of birth. He had flown down from Cape Town to meet up with us and get to know us better.

Several of us had played against Gary, and knew him as a steady, unflappable, phlegmatic opening batsman who went about his business quietly. He was a strong influence for the next three years, but the Perth experience was largely about feeling each other out and him giving vital inputs during various stages of the game. With 413 in the bank, our bowlers were excellent, with Irfan in the forefront, and when RP nailed Shaun Tait, we all let out roars that I am sure echoed across India. We had conquered Perth, where no Asian team had won before. And we finally had an outlet for our pent-up emotions from the Sydney episode.

Bhajji, who wasn’t playing the game, hustled down the stairs from the dressing room, proudly holding aloft the tricolour, and we hoisted him on our shoulders to dedicate the win to him. It’s one of those experiences that will stay with me for life. We had exhibited our strength and character as a team. It would have been easy for us to surrender meekly and seek refuge in excuses, but like we had done in Kolkata in 2001, in Leeds in 2002 and in Johannesburg in 2006, we dug deep to pull off the near impossible. Everyone had been driven, no one had to say ‘Do it for Bhajji’, but every one of us had wanted to do it for our mate, our friend, our brother.

The way the team rallied around Bhajji, and each other, was phenomenal. Anil was awesome with his leadership on and off the field, handling the situation with tact and diplomacy, fairly and transparently. He was exactly the leader we needed at the time, and it was great to see the way he motivated the team. He presented our case forcefully but politely, and made it amply clear that he would always stand by Bhajji. The BCCI backed our stance and ensured that we could concentrate on the cricket by assembling the best possible defence for him. I have heard many people say that Australia should have handled the Monkeygate issue differently, but that is not for me to comment on. All told, it was an unsavoury incident. Thankfully, the appeals commissioner overturned the ban on Bhajji and thus vindicated our stance. I felt that was as big a victory for Indian cricket as the Perth win before it, and the tri-series triumph that was to follow. Before the appeal, there was one more Test to go, in Adelaide. We had momentum on our side, but the flat Adelaide strip thwarted our designs. Viru was back at his attacking best in the first innings, but having conceded a token lead, we were in a little trouble on the final day. With Rahul also unable to continue after breaking his finger, we needed someone to see the team through, and Viru took that responsibility upon himself.

He made a superb 151, but what stood out for me was how out of character that innings was. Between lunch and tea on day five, he hardly struck a ball in anger. How often has Viru gone through a session without hitting a boundary? When he was eventually dismissed, he had steered us to safety. I was happy for him, especially because he had made no secret of his desperation to remain in the Test team. The match-saving century was also his thanksgiving to Anil, who had insisted on his selection even though he hadn’t figured in the long list of 24 probables.

We lost the series 1–2 when we all felt that we should have won it 2–1. Cricket, however, doesn’t always pan out the way one expects it to. The Sydney heartbreak and Monkeygate steeled our resolve, as evidenced not just by the Perth win and the Adelaide draw, but also the stunning conquest of Australia in the final of the tri-series, through a combination of established stars and exciting young talent. I followed the tri-series on television and celebrated wildly when we won the second final and MS lifted the trophy. The Australian tour was not an unqualified success, but we had come out the better for it. Our quest for the No. 1 status was gathering momentum.

Not long after the team under MS returned with the tri-series trophy in their kitbag, it was time to pull out the flannels again. The gaps between Test series allowed me to rest, but it was also a period of excitement and anticipation. I had reconciled to being a Test ‘specialist’—I didn’t foresee another surprise, onematch recall like in South Africa in 2006—and I was comfortable in my skin. This time, the anticipation was tinged with a touch of apprehension. We had a new coach, someone with no great credentials in that capacity. Several of us had played against Gary, but we didn’t exactly have what you would call a relationship. We knew and admired him as a gritty left-hander, an opening batsman who put a huge price on his wicket and who brought the virtues of good, old-fashioned Test match batting with him. But what kind of a coach would he be? The scars from the days of Greg Chappell were still fresh, the wounds still to heal. Would Gary be the balm?

We had a three-day camp in Chennai before the first Test, and the first thing that struck me was how well prepared Gary was. He had brought with him Paddy Upton, the strength and mental conditioning coach, and it was clear that he and Paddy were a solid, unshakeable team who shared a strong bond. If we were sceptical and wondered if Paddy would be to Gary what Ian Fraser was to Greg, that thought disappeared in very quick time.

Gary, mainly, but also Paddy, spoke about their vision for the Indian team, and what it was that they were looking for from us. It was an extension of the feeling-out process that had started in Perth, and there was an immediate level of comfort between Gary, who was not too far removed from our generation, and the team. In the immediacy of Greg’s departure, we had had a host of Indian cricket managers, who had all walked the extra mile to restore equilibrium to a disturbed dressing room. Ravi had kicked off the process in Bangladesh, Chandu sir had taken it to the next level in England, and Lalu had ramped it up thereafter. During this period, Venky and Robin had been outstanding. A lot of the credit must go to all these gentlemen, not so much for getting us back on track in terms of results, but for making the team function in the way that it did. Chennai in March was typically hot and humid, and South Africa kept us on the park for more than a day and a half as they amassed nearly 550. Our reply was magical. In our last Test, in Adelaide, Viru had shown that he could drop anchor if the team so needed. Here, with his confidence buoyed, he went after the bowling like only he could. Agreed, it was a flat surface, but the circumstances made the knock even more special. The conditions were physically draining, we had fielded for more than 150 overs, and there was scoreboard pressure.

Fortunately, Viru had never been fazed by these things, ever. He smashed Dale Steyn, Makhaya Ntini, Morne Morkel and Jacques Kallis to all parts of Chepauk, unleashing an array of strokes that left us dumbfounded. As the ball got older, it started to reverse a bit, but Viru was having an open net, treating his fans to an extraordinary exhibition of ball-striking. He reached his second triple hundred at better than a run a ball—hello!—and Rahul cruised in his wake to a hundred of his own as he completed 10,000 Test runs. A run-fest and a predictable draw, but we had reason to feel good about ourselves. That was only until we started to bat in Ahmedabad. There was some moisture on a slightly grassy surface, and we knew that the ball would do a bit in the first session. We backed ourselves to see those two hours through and then cash in, but our plans were blown away by Steyn, Ntini and Morkel, who exploited the conditions to send us tumbling to 76 all out in just 20 overs. It was an embarrassing batting display, and we had plenty of time to reflect on it as the pitch flattened out as expected and South Africa made merry. Kallis and AB de Villiers punished us and though we fought hard in the second knock, the damage had already been done on the first morning.

Gary took this in silently, encouraging us all the while and willing to give  us the benefit of the doubt. We arrived in Kanpur with a proud home record on the line, and a stand-in, first-time captain in MS after Anil was ruled out with a groin injury. There was no Sachin either—he had missed the Ahmedabad rout too, injured—and we had our work cut out on a turner. Sourav batted really well in making 87 and I didn’t do too badly with a half-century. Either side of those, Bhajji bagged wickets aplenty to help us square the series. A low-key end to an international season that was as dramatic as they come, but as we all dispersed for our first taste of the Indian Premier League (IPL), we were in a far better place than 12 months earlier.

The first edition of the IPL, in 2008, was an exhilarating experience, the perfect cocktail of cricket and entertainment. For us, it was a relief of sorts from the high-pressure environment that was international cricket. It wasn’t that we didn’t take the Twenty20 format seriously. It was just that the first year, especially, was something like a carnival, and most of us relished the freedom of going out and playing our strokes without inhibitions. The approach to the IPL changed within a year. There was probably more pressure than even while playing for the country because of the understandable demand for results from franchise owners who pumped in huge amounts of money.

The advent of the IPL meant we were playing almost round the year, which posed immense demands on body and mind for those who were regulars in both the Test and ODI setups. MS took the bold and somewhat unprecedented step in that era of sitting out the Test series that followed in Sri Lanka. It took guts because he was putting his place on the line, but MS has always done things his way and this was an early indication that he wasn’t afraid to buck the trend. Sri Lanka wasn’t a great outing for various reasons. Even though the conditions there aren’t very different from those in India, we have always found Sri Lanka in their backyard a very difficult side to overcome. This time, we had the added challenge of facing up to Ajantha Mendis, the mystery spinner who had already destroyed us with a six-wicket burst in the final of the Asia Cup in Karachi a month earlier. At that point, the consensus was that Dravid, Tendulkar, Laxman and Ganguly, none of whom was in that Asia Cup squad, would handle him easily. How wrong everyone was.

We had simply never encountered a bowler like Mendis. I had huge problems reading him. I was playing him solely as an off-spinner because his stock delivery was the off-break. His wicket-taking delivery, however, was the leg-cutter, which didn’t bounce at all and left the right-hand batsman very sharply. Since I played for the off-break, I was shaping more towards the on-side and getting out in different ways. I was dismissed caught at mid-wicket on the pull, I was stumped, I was caught behind, I was leg before. It wasn’t just me. Apart from Viru and to some extent Gautam Gambhir, the rest of us struggled to get a fix, and that was disappointing because the four of us in the middle order were the more experienced ones. We saw a lot of videos, identified his release points—things we do before any series when we are confronted with a new bowler. We talked about Mendis at team meetings, we discussed him in private conversations. He was effective because he was so accurate, and the lengths he bowled did not allow us to rotate strike freely. I could not pick his carrom ball either. I used to react off the pitch, but because the ball was skidding through at pace, I found that I was always late on the shot. Over time, we figured him out and even mastered him, but in that series, it was definitely a huge challenge for us.

Mendis finished as the highest wicket-taker, ahead even of the great Muttiah Muralitharan. Sri Lanka had a good attack with Chaminda Vaas and Nuwan Kulasekara taking the new ball, but it was the spinners who tied us up in knots in the first and third Tests.

Our struggles put Viru’s dominating double hundred in Galle in perspective. We had been hammered by an innings in the first Test but in the second, Viru took Mendis and the rest to the cleaners with a blistering 201. Out of 329. Gautam weighed in with 56. Apart from them, I was the only one to reach double figures (39). Both openers made half-centuries in our second innings too, and then Bhajji and Anil took six wickets between them to bowl us to a series-levelling win. We returned to Colombo for the decider and were well beaten, with Mendis the destroyer-in-chief.

Ironically, it was because of an injury that I played my best knock of the series, in the final innings of the tour. I twisted my ankle while fielding, and could not go out to bat till we were five wickets down in the second innings. The ankle was swollen and I needed a runner—allowed at that stage—and it was with that sprained, swollen ankle that I played Mendis the best. When I was injury free, I could stretch a lot and that was getting me into trouble because I was often playing around my front pad. Because of the injury, I could get only a short stretch in, which meant I was forced to play straight. Almost by accident, I got a hang of Mendis and finished 61 not out, my only fifty in six innings, but even I knew that it was too little, far too late.

This was also the series in which the review process was trialled for the first time. It was called the Umpire Decision Review System, and we had a horrendous experience all the way through. A majority of the reviews went against us, and we couldn’t fathom how. I haven’t come across a spinner who bowls straighter lines than Anil, but the predictive ball-tracking technology somehow always showed the ball missing the stumps. Sri Lanka got loads of reviews right, we got most of them wrong. Given that the ball-tracking technology was not a system-generated mechanism, it was anything but foolproof, or so we thought. We slowly began to lose faith in the system. That’s one of the reasons why it took us eight more years to fully embrace the DRS, by when we understood that it was in place to eliminate the truly bad decisions, the howlers.

Maybe, as a team, we should have approached the process differently. We didn’t discuss it much leading up to the series, and there was no strategy in place. Generally, Anil went by his gut when he was bowling, and with the inputs of the bowler and the wicketkeeper—it’s worth remembering that both Dinesh Karthik and then Parthiv were filling in for MS—we decided whether to challenge the umpire’s decision. As more and more reviews, particularly off his bowling, went against us, Anil became distinctly unhappy with the system. He wasn’t the only one. We had no trust in the process then. That we are now using the DRS even in the IPL shows how far we have come since. Interestingly, it was when Anil became the head coach of the national team that, finally, we acknowledged the virtues of the DRS.

Our inglorious tryst with the DRS was topped only by our inability to get a hang of Mendis. Predictably, back in India, questions started to be raised over our places. Sachin was never going to be under scrutiny, but Rahul, Sourav and I felt the pressure. We knew we had let the team down, and we felt the heat. While we were confident we would bounce back, we were not sure if the selectors shared that confidence.

Our next assignment was a four-Test series at home against Australia. Given what had happened Down Under earlier in the year, we couldn’t wait for Ricky’s team to arrive. The wounds were still fresh, and we wanted closure of sorts. We warmed up for the series with the Irani Cup, against Ranji champions Delhi, in Vadodara. It was like a dress rehearsal, almost the entire Indian team against a strong Delhi side that included Viru, Gautam, a very young Virat Kohli, Ashish Nehra and Ishant Sharma. Sourav was conspicuous by his non-selection to the Rest of India squad, and I feared the worst for him.

However, he was there in the list of probables for the Australia series, and we had a wonderful four-day camp in Bangalore that was half team-bonding, half cricket.

The camp in Chennai before the South Africa series had been a businesslike affair. It was our first interaction with our new coach, and we had been a little guarded because of our experience with his predecessor. Between March and October, however, we had got to know Gary and Paddy better, and shed most of our inhibitions.

Much of the attention at the Bangalore camp was on getting our roles right. There wasn’t too much emphasis on fine-tuning our skills. We regrouped and spelt out our vision for the next one year. Paddy tried to learn what made each one of us tick, hoping to understand us and help us understand ourselves. He handed out a questionnaire for us to fill. Among the questions were—How do you react to criticism? What do you feel when someone praises you? Do you feel the pressure when you are out in the middle?

The answers were supposed to indicate if we could motivate ourselves, or needed an external nudge. The vast majority of us, it seemed, needed external motivation—we tended to perform better if someone shook us up after a couple of bad performances.

One of the highlights of the camp was a day out at a Manipal resort organised by Anil, who was then their brand ambassador. We were divided into three batches, and each team had to produce a 12-minute movie. Our group included Rahul, Bhajji, Viru, Venky and Munaf Patel, and we enacted Singh Is King. Sachin, MS and some of the others produced Sholay, while a majority of the support staff performed Rock On!!

When I say produce a movie, I mean precisely that. Each group was given three hours to write the script, film it, edit and come up with the final product. Make-up artists, costumes and different kinds of wigs were at our disposal, we had all the props required to make a film. Singh Is King had just hit the screens, so we decided to adapt it and make a movie on Bhajji’s life. Rahul, ever happy in the background, was our cameraman. Viru was dressed up as a girl and played an obsessive fan of Bhajji.

Sachin enacted Amjad Khan’s character Gabbar Singh, while Ishant was Basanti, and Sholay was a big hit, but Rock On was the highlight of the evening, an unbelievably slick production by the support staff. Our masseur Ramesh Mane, Mane kaka to all of us, was the showstopper while logistics manager Russell Radhakrishnan wasn’t far behind with his acting and dancing skills. At the end of it all, we had an awards night to match any other. The three movies were shown on a giant screen one after the other. Anil had invited an eminent and qualified jury to judge our performances. Viru walked away with the Best Actress Award, and the Best Film went to Rock On. Mock protests and staged walkouts expressing displeasure at the results rounded off an unprecedented evening as we let our hair down and did something totally different.

Paddy told us the next day that the idea behind the exercise was to get us out of our comfort zone and challenge our thought processes. ‘Gary and I wanted to get rid of the monotony and get your creative juices going,’ he said. We had a lot of fun, but also learnt plenty about ourselves and each other. Most importantly, we realised that being taken out of our comfort zone wasn’t anywhere near as traumatic as we had feared.

Our minds, even if briefly, were freed of the tensions that had accompanied us from Sri Lanka. Gary began to come into his own, comfortable in his knowledge of his players and aware that he had won our respect with his approach, work ethic and, most importantly, attitude. He was a behind-thescenes man who believed in leading by example. One of the things he stressed was that when he was a player, there were several things that the coaches did which he did not enjoy, and he would not put us through those experiences. Even though he had no formal coaching experience, he was an excellent manmanager. He had played more than 100 Tests and was a fantastic technician, but he didn’t interfere with our techniques. Instead, he encouraged everyone to play to their strengths.

Gary did not tell us what to do. He would talk to us about the different ways of going about our business, and the potential outcome of each of those paths. He would then give us the freedom to choose our path, but ask that we be accountable for it. Subtly, he transferred the responsibility back on to the players by empowering us. There was no compromise on preparation, but he didn’t ram stuff down our throats. If, for instance, someone didn’t want to net on the eve of the match, Gary was fine with that, so long as it didn’t impact his effort. Gary focused on effort more than performance, on the process rather than the result. He was a family man steeped in values such as honesty and integrity, and that resonated with us. To him, there were no seniors or juniors. He treated everyone the same, with respect but also with firmness if the occasion so demanded. He cracked the whip when we slackened, and when we thought we had reason to be on top of the world, he immediately brought us back to earth in his understated, non-confrontational but extremely effective way.

He had wonderful support from Paddy, and even though we sadly lost Robin and Venky during his tenure, we never felt that Gary was packing the support staff with ‘his’ men. Over time, Gary went from being coach to friend and confidant to many of us. We could talk to him as equals, just as we could share our goals and visions and fears with Paddy without worrying about which publication these might worm their way into.

Gary was also tough as nails. One of the things he and Anil stressed at that camp before the Australia series was that we had to get under the skin of the opposition. Australia were very good at dishing it out, but not so good when they were at the receiving end. It was decided that Zak would go after Hayden at every possible opportunity, and Bhajji would target his bunny, Ponting. Whenever we could, we would do everything within limits to rattle them. That’s why, after he and Bhajji put on a half-century stand in the first Test, Zak famously said that if Australia couldn’t get him and Bhajji out, he couldn’t see them taking 20 wickets and winning a Test match. Or when I, uncharacteristically, said at the press conference after the Delhi Test that this Australian team was different from previous ones in that their natural aggression was missing.

Before the Bangalore Test, Sourav dropped a bombshell, announcing that he would retire at the end of the series. That came out of the blue because he was striking the ball well and still had a couple of good years left in him. But he felt he had had enough of looking over his shoulder, of worrying about his place in the team, of putting his fate in others’ hands, at that stage of his life. His last Test was a month away, so the words didn’t sink in immediately, but there was a sense of personal loss because we had almost grown up together as Test players. We had agreed to disagree on issues, and I had been upset with his decisions more than once, but that never came in the way of our friendship. To see him ride away into the sunset would not be easy.

Bangalore saved and Mohali won on the back of a brilliant spell of reverseswing bowling by Zak, we went to Delhi for an eventful third Test. Mohali was studded with individual milestones—Sachin went past Brian Lara’s record for most Test runs, Amit Mishra took a five-for on debut, and MS won his second Test as captain, after a groin injury had again kept Anil out.

I had a modest series, with a highest of 42 not out in three hits. I felt I was playing well, but not getting the returns I deserved. Including the Sri Lanka series, I had made just one half-century in nine innings, which was anything but ideal for someone about to complete a dozen years in Test cricket. I made use of the extra time from a four-day finish in Mohali to make a visit to Shirdi before the Delhi Test.

Every time I returned from Shirdi, I was enveloped by a blanket of calmness and reassurance. It helped too, that Zak, my great friend, gave me throw-downs ahead of the Kotla Test and predicted a hundred for me. His prediction wasn’t off the mark; I ended up getting a double! So did Gautam, with whom I put up nearly 300. The little fella got physical with Shane Watson and copped a one-Test ban, but what stood out for me was that while he did cross the line, he wasn’t afraid of taking on someone much bigger than him. Gauti is one of those feisty characters you would want to take alongside you to war; he gives his all every single day.

After we amassed more than 600, Australia replied in kind through a strong batting display. We were without Bhajji, out injured, and the slowness of the track frustrated our spinners, though Viru bowled beautifully to take five wickets. Anil split the webbing on his hand and immediately had a procedure. It was typical of him to come back with the injury and grab a caught-and-bowled to end the Australian first innings, but when I went to meet him in his room that evening, I had a bad feeling.

His wife Chetana was by his side, and Anil looked really tired. He had missed the previous Test due to a groin injury that was becoming increasingly troublesome, and had been contemplating retirement for some time. The split webbing would rule him out of the last Test in Nagpur, and our next series was another month and a half away, so he had decided the time was right for him to walk away from the sport he had served so wonderfully well for so  long. I knew that retirement was on the cards, but it was like a body blow.

Listening to him sitting there calmly and telling me that the next day would be his last in Test cricket knocked the breath out of me. I couldn’t imagine an Indian dressing room without Anil. Even as he told me that his body was not responding anymore, I tried my best to persuade him to stay on. I urged him to miss Nagpur but to think of retirement after the England series. He smiled at me with finality. ‘I am done, Lax.’

He told the team of his decision in the dressing room the next day, and there wasn’t a dry eye. Anil Kumble meant so much to so many people, but nothing defined him better than ‘team man’. He bowled a few overs after a token declaration on the final day, and when the match was called off, we took him on a lap around his beloved Kotla. As news had spread that it was going to be the great man’s last day in India whites, the crowds had flocked in to give their hero a fitting farewell. My eyes welled up with pride and sadness as I saw how deeply my friend had touched so many people.

I was the man of the match for my 200, but I would have swapped it for a few more days alongside Anil in the dressing room. He is easily one of the greatest competitors I have played with or against and inarguably the greatest match-winner in Indian cricket. But slowly, reality started sinking in. No Anil. And no Sourav after the next game. Two of my friends, two pillars of Indian cricket, hanging up their boots. To be honest, it was a little scary. That next game, in Nagpur, was my 100th Test. I was at once elated and humbled. I had aspired to play at least one Test for India when I took the serious plunge into cricket. And look where it had brought me. Never in my wildest dreams had I thought 100. And yet, here it was. My parents, Sailaja, coaches and friends from Hyderabad, who had been an integral part of my journey, were all present to usher in the occasion, and I was determined to  put on a show. There was a huge clamour for a century in my 100th Test, and I wanted it too, badly, in the first Test at the new VCA Stadium. As it turned out, I only made 64, but that was all right because we won the Test. And the series.

It could so easily not have been, however. Even though we had an 86-run lead, we were in a spot at 166 for 6, with MS, in his first Test as full-fledged captain, and Bhajji in the middle. Another wicket then, and Australia were looking at a target of less than 300. Brett Lee had bowled well all through the innings and the 50-over-old ball was reversing. Everything was in place for Brett to step in and land the killer punches, but Ponting strangely kept him out of the attack. Australia were behind the over rate and Ponting risked suspension if they didn’t catch up. The fear of suspension took precedence over the prospect of losing the series as Ponting bowled Mike Hussey and Michael Clarke to make up for the slow over rate. We were astonished, but also grateful. MS and Bhajji added 108 to take the game beyond Australia’s reach, and the spinners then took over to bowl us to a commanding victory.

Towards the end of the Test, in one of those unfussy but wonderful gestures so typical of him, MS handed over the captaincy to Sourav. It was a sweet move, a sign of respect and appreciation for what Sourav had done for Indian cricket, and MS immediately went up a few notches in our estimation. Sourav handed the reins back after a couple of overs, and when the final wicket fell, fittingly to Bhajji, the payback was complete. We didn’t look at it as revenge. Instead, we felt justice had been done, finally, after nine months.

We celebrated joyfully at the end of the Test match, which had itself seemed like one long celebration. At the end of the second day, the BCCI had felicitated Anil and Sourav on their retirements, Sachin on scoring the most Test runs and me on playing my 100th Test, a reasonably formal event full of goodwill. The party at the hotel after the Test ended was anything but formal. We were thrilled at having given a fitting farewell to Anil and Sourav. We would miss them later. But for now, we decided to make the most of the moment, and just enjoy having them in our midst. MS had asked Anil to accompany him to receive the Border–Gavaskar Trophy, which was another fine gesture. After we reached the hotel, we all let our hair down.

Everyone, including the teetotallers among us, had to have at least some alcohol, it was decided. But who would bell the Anil cat? Who had the guts to thrust a glass into his hand and get him to take a sip? That onerous responsibility fell on my shoulders, and being the good sport that he is, Anil obliged with a smile, which turned into a grimace the moment the liquid hit his tongue. I won’t forget that look on his face. Ever.

Anil and Sourav had to climb on to a chair and give their retirement speeches, which were both funny and emotional. I don’t remember much of what was said. It wasn’t an occasion for talking but for feeling. A glorious era was coming to an end in Indian cricket, but as always, a new dawn awaited. Dhoni’s appointment as Anil’s successor came as no surprise—he had already led the team in two Tests when Anil was injured. I must admit I thought it was a left-field choice when he was named captain for the World T20 in 2007. That team included Viru, who had already led in Tests, and the experienced Yuvi, but the selectors saw a spark in MS and handed him the reins. The rest, of course, is history.MS taking over from Anil was a futuristic move. He was already the whiteball skipper, and his elevation to Test captaincy was a natural progression. I was extremely impressed with how MS approached the Test captaincy. His maturity, balanced approach, game awareness and understanding of the psyche of his teammates helped get the best out of everyone. What stood out was the way he handled the senior players under him—Sachin, Rahul, Viru, Bhajji, Zak and I. We were all leaders within the group. We were self-motivated and took a lot of pride in our performance, and he enabled us. His man-management was outstanding, his self-belief refreshingly reassuring. I never got the impression that he was insecure or that he looked over his shoulder because there were so many seniors in the team.

MS was non-interfering when it came to the established core group, but he invited suggestions from all of us. Whether he took those suggestions on board or not was not important. But he did hear everyone out before making his decision. The buck stopped with him, but by involving us in the process, he sent out a strong message of inclusiveness. If MS had been insecure and had not sought us out, there was every possibility that we might have gone about our business, not knowing if the skipper even wanted our inputs.

He didn’t believe in giving stirring speeches at team meetings. His contention was that if you were good enough to be picked to play for the country, you should know what to do. Whatever needed to be said to his team, he said it on the field. Off the field, Gary handled the primary responsibilities— making the right selection calls, providing a good team environment and preparation.

Dhoni’s calmness and equanimity are legendary. He had seen nothing but success until the tour of England in 2011. We had lost 4–0 in England and had already lost the first three Tests in Australia by the end of that year, and were heading for another whitewash. I was a mess, as were most of the guys, but MS was unbelievably composed. Not once did he lash out, and at no stage did he give the impression that he was frustrated or helpless. I asked him how he could remain so unaffected by the results, especially in light of the angry and humiliating reactions from all quarters. I prided myself on being level-headed, but MS took it to another level when he said, ‘Lachi bhai, what is the point of feeling dejected and depressed? All it will do is harm your performance even more. We must identify the areas where we are lacking, and address them. That is the only way forward.’

Sitting in the calm of one’s living room, his words seem obvious and straightforward. But that MS could keep his wits about him and zero in on the larger picture in the most trying circumstances was staggering. He didn’t become a successful captain by accident. The more time I spent with him, the more I was entranced by the simplicity of his thinking, and his attitude to the sport that has made him the icon he is.

One of my abiding memories is of MS driving the team bus to the hotel in Nagpur, during my 100th Test. I couldn’t believe my eyes—the captain of the team driving us back from the ground! It was his first Test in charge after Anil’s retirement, and he didn’t seem to have a care in the world. But he was like that, playful and grounded.

Cricket was important to him, but it wasn’t the only thing in his life. When he committed to playing, he did so without holding back, but when off the ground, he had varied interests, and the wisdom to not let himself be ruled by outcomes. I was a little envious of his attitude. I love the sport and mostly played it for fun, but the longer you play, the more it can become a job. You are engrossed in your performance, in the fortunes of the team, and the enjoyment can ebb away from time to time. But MS never lost the joy, the playfulness. I have never met anyone quite like him. His room was open to all when he first came into the squad, and even during my last Test, by which time he was already one of India’s most successful captains, he didn’t shut the door until it was time for him to hit the bed.

We had England on the menu as our first Test opponents following the retirement of Anil and Sourav, with an ODI series preceding the Test matches. I was at home, watching the one-day team running rings around the Englishmen and eagerly awaiting the birth of our second child, when the heinous Mumbai terror attacks were unleashed on 26/11. We were in shock. None of us could understand what drove people to take other peoples’ lives without compunction. This was too close to home to not rattle and enrage every single Indian. England justifiably abandoned the ODI series but to their great credit, they  returned for a two-Test series within a fortnight. They could easily have chosen not to, and no one would have blamed them. I dread to imagine how much that would have set us back, because we all know what happened in Pakistan when the Sri Lankan team bus was attacked the following year. The England team was playing in Cuttack when the Mumbai attacks took place, but had they opted to stay back at home citing security fears, other teams might have followed suit and we might have missed out on hosting international cricket for a long time. We had reason to be grateful to Kevin Pietersen, to the English cricket board and to the players for returning to India for the Test matches.

The Chennai win will remain one of my most emotionally charged memories for obvious reasons. The match was supposed to have been held in Mumbai, but circumstances forced the shift, and we wanted to do everything possible to put a smile on the faces of our countrymen, if only for a moment. England were having none of it, and they dominated the play for three-and-ahalf days, eventually setting us a target of 387 in around 120 overs. No team had scored that many runs in the fourth innings to win a Test in India, but then, no one else had Viru amidst them.

In an hour and a half, he emphatically overturned thoughts of scrambling for a draw with a mesmeric assault on the unsuspecting Englishmen. Batting like a man possessed, he thrashed 83 in just 68 deliveries so that when play began on the final day, we needed only 256 with nine wickets standing. I don’t say ‘only’ flippantly. If not for Viru, we could easily have been looking at 325. We lost a few early wickets on the final morning, but at no stage did we think of anything other than victory. There was a sense of calm certainty in the dressing room as Sachin and Yuvi went about the task. Yuvi batted as if in an ODI, and Sachin’s eyes had that steely look that indicated no let-up. He, more than anyone else, had been shaken up by the Mumbai attacks, and he wanted to win it for the Mumbaikars, for all of India. He would have to be dismissed, he wasn’t throwing it away.

MS, padded up to go in next, was the most relaxed amongst us. But like him, we too had faith that Sachin and Yuvi would get the job done. We trusted our colleagues, and they never panicked. When Sachin brought up his century and the winning runs, Chepauk erupted. Sachin made a moving speech at the presentation ceremony, his voice choking. For a while, India heralded the stunning triumph and briefly put the Mumbai disaster to one side. As cricketers and ambassadors, we were happy to have made a positive difference to our countrymen, though victory in a Test match can hardly atone for the mindless violence and the loss of hundreds of innocent lives. The post-match celebrations were understandably muted.

Mohali was an unremarkable draw, but we had won another series in trying circumstances. Given the pall of gloom that enveloped the nation, it was a lowkey face-off but in beating a strong England side on the back of walloping the formidable Australians, we had taken a step closer to our mission. The next challenge was three months away, in a country where we hadn’t won a series in more than 30 years. New Zealand, here we come.

The limited-overs leg preceded the Test matches in New Zealand, and as it turned out, was a sign of things to come. We lost the T20 series but won the ODIs 3–1. Some of us Test specialists hadn’t played any cricket since the Duleep Trophy in late January—the Test series started in the third week of March—so the BCCI requested the New Zealand Cricket Board to accommodate us in some of their state sides for one first-class game. I played for Otago against Wellington, for whom Balaji played, in cold Dunedin, and the wind chill made it an extremely uncomfortable four days.

I didn’t make a lot of runs but spent more than three hours at the crease in two innings combined, which gave me a reasonable feel for the conditions. But I hadn’t had a great series against England, and was reasonably subdued in the first Test in Hamilton. Sachin played a fabulous knock, and the rest batted around him as we stacked up a huge first-innings total and grabbed a handy lead. By now, we expected to dominate the opposition, but also not slacken or take the foot off the pedal. If the pacers had done the damage in the first innings, Bhajji was too good for the Kiwis in the second innings, leaving us with a small total to chase. We knocked off the runs in quick time, as I tasted a Test win on New Zealand soil for the first time.

Our challenge as a team was to back up this victory with another solid performance; the past had taught us valuable lessons. On a flat surface in Napier, New Zealand amassed more than 600, thanks to a classy double hundred by the likeable Jesse Ryder. We didn’t bat well at all, conceding a lead of more than 300 by gifting our wickets away. New Zealand asked us to follow-on in the final session of day three. We needed to bat out of our skins for two days to preserve our hard-earned lead.

I was happy with the way I had batted in the first innings, but not with how I had got out and when I had got out. Manohar sir, my childhood coach, who had since moved to New Zealand, had come down from Auckland to Napier to see me bat. I was determined to celebrate his presence with a hundred, but having reached 76, I played loosely outside off to the second new ball, to be caught in the slips. I felt I owed Manohar sir a hundred, so I told myself that if I got a chance in the second innings, I wouldn’t let him down a second time.

Our second-innings fightback is one of the memories I will cherish. I will also never forget how Viru, our captain for the game, was dismissed in the second innings. Stumps on day three was less than 45 minutes away when Daniel Vettori brought Jeetan Patel on. The off-spinner was to Viru what a red flag is to a bull. He was itching to have a go, hit each ball for a six, totally oblivious to the fact that we were trying to save the Test. He swung at Patel once too often to be leg before for 22 off 21 balls, with four fours. When we needed to bat nearly 200 overs to save the Test! In the dressing room, we didn’t know how to react. Viru could be exasperating when he got out this way, but he had also amassed runs with the same approach.

I had a long wait before going in to bat, early on the final morning. Both Rahul and Sachin made half-centuries and ate up a lot of deliveries, but the real star was Gautam, whom Viru famously called the Wall from the North of India at the end of the game. The little man kept out everything New Zealand hurled at him with unwavering focus. He didn’t care if the scoreboard came to a standstill, he didn’t care if he remained scoreless for long periods. His only concern was occupying the crease, and he did that with limitless patience and the concentration of a Zen master.

We were still trailing by 60-odd when Sachin was dismissed on day five, and I watched Gautam go about his business from the non-striker’s end for more than three hours. Clearly, the string of recent good scores had lifted his confidence to astronomical levels. Gautam was normally an attacking batsman. However, given the situation, he put team before self, keeping out ball after ball, offering a barn-door defence that New Zealand simply couldn’t break down. My chest swelled with pride at the other end. Gauti was a true fighter, if ever there was one.

Gautam and I put on nearly a hundred when finally, after a ten-and-a-halfhour vigil, New Zealand saw the back of him. As he walked off to a warm reception, I reflected on having witnessed one of the greatest overseas knocks by an Indian batsman. Often, it is the big hundreds and the double tons that are extolled. Gautam’s final tally was 137, but to me, it was as good as a double, if not more. The record books show that he played for 643 minutes and faced 436 deliveries. Need I say more?

Once I realised that the game was safe, I played a few strokes and Yuvi lit up the final session by peppering the fence. When we shook hands, I had made my way to 124. I was glad to have made my coach happy, and even happier that we had pulled off a great escape. The second innings had been an opportunity for us to showcase our character in a tough situation, and we took pride in the way we had fought it out. Before the second innings, Gary had asked us to put up a fight, and not worry about the result. We had done exactly that.

We should have completed a 2–0 victory after dominating the Wellington Test, but the rain halted our charge. These were the windiest conditions in which I had played a game of cricket, and it was chilly, ice-cold wind. It was so cold that my ears were aching, and I found myself donning a beanie while fielding. Gauti rounded off the tour with a sparkling 167, off just 257 deliveries. What a contrast to his stonewalling in Napier.

We came back from New Zealand with a first Test series win there since 1976. It was a heady feeling, and we felt that our goal wasn’t far away. In the previous three years, we had won Test series in the Caribbean, England and now New Zealand, and Test matches in Australia and South Africa. We knew the top step of the podium was within reach, but there was a long break before our next Test series. The excitement would have to be tempered for now, as the second season of the IPL headed to South Africa. Our next Test match wasn’t for another seven months.

Wanting to make the most of the long gap between the end of the IPL and the start of the domestic season, I returned to England for a second stint with Lancashire. After a slow start, I gathered steam and ended the season with two hundreds in the last two games, and four in all in 11 matches. By then, the Lancastrians had taken me to heart as much as I had them, and it was an enjoyable three and a half months at Old Trafford, not far from the iconic venue of the same name where Manchester United played their home games in the English Premier League.

That 2009–10 season, we were scheduled to play only five Tests—three at home against Sri Lanka, followed by two in Bangladesh. We knew that if we defeated Sri Lanka 2–0, we would ascend the throne. For the first time. We would be the No. 1 Test team in the world. The summit was a couple of steps away, and undoubtedly, those would be the toughest, most demanding steps. Even without Gary’s constant urgings, we were experienced enough to remain in the moment, and not take anything for granted. Any lingering complacency was comprehensively exploded in Ahmedabad on the first morning of the series against Sri Lanka, when Chanaka Welegedara, a somewhat unheralded left-arm paceman, gobbled up our top order. In no time, we were 32 for 4, but we also had in our midst a master of such situations. Rahul batted sensationally to make a massive hundred, Yuvi kept him company during the stabilising phase and MS then tore into the Sri Lankans as we recovered to top 400. With the two Jayawardenes feasting on runs and giving Sri Lanka a lead of over 300, we were forced to bat for the second time in three Tests to save the match. Gautam, in the middle of the purplest of patches, struck another hundred, and we rallied around him, while Sachin rounded things off with a century of his own as the Test produced upwards of 1600 runs and only 21 wickets.

The flatness of the Ahmedabad surface had sucked the life out of the first Test, and we now had to win both the remaining Tests for the 2–0 scoreline we were after. To our consternation, a second batting beauty awaited us in the form of the Kanpur pitch. Gauti, Viru and Rahul made attractive tons as we scored heavily and quickly, at more than four an over. We thought we needed the time to make inroads into a strong Sri Lankan batting line-up, until Sreesanth stepped up and blew them away. It was his comeback to Test cricket after 18 months, but he looked like he had never been away. He was quick, he got the ball to go a long way, and made a mockery of the lack of assistance by sending Sri Lanka crashing to a low first-innings score. Few Indian quicks have had such remarkable control over wrist and seam positions, few have been blessed with such raw, natural talent. Had things panned out differently, Sreesanth could have gone on to become one of India’s most successful pacemen.

Once he picked up the five-for and MS promptly applied the follow-on, the result was inevitable. Sri Lanka keeled over by an innings.

The Brabourne Stadium at the Cricket Club of India is a quaint venue, forced to play second fiddle to the Wankhede after having been the most iconic ground in Mumbai for a long time. With the Wankhede undergoing redevelopment ahead of the 2011 World Cup, Test cricket returned to Brabourne after thirty-six and a half years, and what a return it turned out to be! With the ball coming on to the bat, the runs flowed, but there was also help for the bowlers. Sri Lanka posted close to 400 early on day two, but what followed was unbelievable. Viru let loose, and the Sri Lankans had nowhere to hide. They had a strong attack—Welegedara, Murali, Nuwan Kulasekara and Rangana Herath—but Viru took them apart with scant regard for reputation or quality. I have seen all of Viru’s destructive innings, and this ranks up there with the best.

By the end of the second day, we easily went past Sri Lanka’s tally, and Viru moved to within 16 runs of becoming the first man to make three triple hundreds in Test cricket. The crowds thronged the stadium on the third morning, but disappointment was in store as he fell to Murali for 293. While the rest of the world regretted the elusive seven runs, Viru revelled in having smashed 293. I can’t think of another cricketer with his attitude, though he did promise that evening never to heed Rahul’s advice again.

With stumps looming on the second day and Viru closing in on 300, Rahul had told him to hold back a little, perhaps remembering how he had been dismissed for 195 in the Boxing Day Test in 2003. ‘See off the evening, come back fresh and get the job done tomorrow,’ was Rahul’s well-meaning advice. ‘I should have just hit three sixes and got the job done,’ Viru laughed. ‘Not going to listen to Rahul from now on!’

All through the series, I had batted fluently but without getting a hundred. Before the last Test, I practised hitting the off-break over mid-on because I knew that if Murali bowled a leg-stump line, my scoring options would otherwise be restricted as I didn’t play the sweep a lot. I was in good flow, having reached a third half-century of the series, when I tried to clear mid-on and holed out. I was furious with myself for having thrown my wicket away for a second straight match, and still cursing myself in the evening when Gary walked into the dressing room.

‘Threw it away again, Gary,’ I whined.

I was expecting a similar response from him, because that’s what I had got from coaches before. I braced for an explosion.

‘You have been practising that shot a lot and it was in your game plan,’ Gary said instead, calm as he always was. ‘You stuck to your game plan. The execution was not perfect, but don’t beat yourself up over it.’

I was stunned. Similar dismissals had earned rebukes from past coaches, who had lambasted what they had felt was a casual approach. Gary’s perspective was totally different and refreshing. It was then, after more than 13 years of international cricket, that I realised there was another, positive way of looking at things. The clouds of darkness that had gathered in my mind were further lifted when MS blazed to a hundred. Pragyan Ojha made just five in a last-wicket stand of 50-plus as MS rained sixes to effortlessly touch three figures and immediately applied the declaration. The demoralised and dispirited Sri Lankans ran into a pumped up Zak in the second dig and stood no chance. MS and Bhajji combined to account for the last wicket, and even as Murali’s skier went up in the air, all of us ran towards the stumps, ready to uproot them as souvenirs once the catch was taken and the final wicket prised out.

The summit had been scaled, the pinnacle reached. We were the No. 1 Test team in the world. It was surreal. There were huge smiles and big hugs over and over again as we recognised that the pot of gold was not a mirage anymore. The goal of 2001 had been achieved on 6 December 2009.

It occurred to me that eight and a half years between aspiring to be the best in the world and finally getting there was a little too long. Given our exploits in 2001, I had thought we would scale the summit by 2007, at the latest. We had missed our chances to win a series in Australia, twice, and also in South Africa. With the potential we had as a team, we should have got to No. 1 much earlier. But never mind, we were here, at long last, and that’s what mattered. Delight was understandably tinged with relief.

Especially for someone who never played in a World Cup, this was as good as it got. This was like lifting the World Cup in Test cricket. All right, so there was no trophy to hold up and no photo-ops, but so what?

Now, there were new goals to set, new targets to achieve. We had to prove to ourselves that we weren’t accidental No. 1s, that we deserved to be there, and for long. We had the talent and the ability for it, and we had the resources that could keep Indian cricket on top for a long time. I missed Anil and Sourav’s presence in the dressing room, because they had been as integral to our ascension as anyone else. But life has to go on, and we had reconciled to their retirements. The game would not slow down for any individual. And we had to move along too. ‘India—Test No. 1’ had a nice ring to it. This was not the end of the journey, but we could allow ourselves a long pause and soak in the heady emotion of being first among equals.

