It comes as a surprise even to me that I was among the first Indians to play 20- over cricket. Not in the shape and form it has taken today, but 20-over cricket nevertheless, and more than two decades ago at that.

My first T20 experience was in 1995, when I was with Hanging Heaton in the Bradford league in Yorkshire. Our 50-over club games were on Saturdays, so on Wednesdays, we would play 20-over matches, which started at 6 in the evening. It wasn’t a slam-bang affair, and no one tried to hit the cover off the ball. Since it was something of a midweek hit-out, we treated it as a practice outing for the big game at the weekend. Generally, the top three or four would bat out the entire 20 overs, and not worry too much about what the score read at the end of 120 deliveries. Not quite the ideal start to my T20 career, admittedly. The T20 revolution started in the early 2000s, but it wasn’t until the IPL arrived with its heady mix of cricket and entertainment, of Bollywood and highprofile industrialist owners, that it grabbed the consciousness of the Indian fan. And, as it turned out, the IPL made its debut against the perfect backdrop. India were reluctant practitioners of the 20-over game. Prior to the inaugural World T20 in South Africa in 2007, we had played just one international fixture. The attitude to the format at that time was evident from the team that went to South Africa; it had very few experienced names. Several established players had opted out. Rahul, who was our Test and ODI captain then, along with Sachin and Sourav, skipped the event to enjoy a little break before the season to follow, and India sent out a youngish team under MS. For the first time since Kapil paaji’s squad went to England in 1983 for the World Cup, an Indian team was competing in a global cricket tournament without the massive weight of expectations. Given that Indian fans hadn’t been exposed to the format beyond the rebel Indian Cricket League (ICL), they didn’t know what to expect. And since all the top guns were missing, they certainly didn’t expect the team to go all the way. How wrong everyone was. That first World T20 became an unqualified success globally, and the Indian team’s searing run meant there was massive and immediate interest across our cricket-crazed country. The spectacle that South Africa threw up was riveting, made even more attractive by Yuvi’s six sixes in an over, by the bowlout win against Pakistan in the league phase, and by the five-run win, also against Pakistan, in a gripping finale.

It is more than likely that the IPL would have grown into the behemoth it is today, no matter what happened in South Africa. That India came out of nowhere and stunned everyone with their title triumph hastened the process. Before our World Cup win in 1983, India was primarily a Test nation. Our focus was on Test cricket, with the 50-over game being a bit of an afterthought. Kapil paaji’s team were 66-to-1 outsiders going into the World Cup, but after they felled the mighty West Indies in the final, they catalysed a change in India’s approach to the limited-overs game. India had been a modest one-day side till then, but galvanised by the World Cup triumph, we began to do consistently well in the one-day format. Our glorious run to the World Championship of Cricket title in Australia in 1985 reinforced our status as one-day giants.

The World T20 win in South Africa was the equivalent of the World Cup win of 1983 in terms of creating an awareness and a buzz. The IPL was a winwin even before it started. India had won the World T20 just seven months before the IPL commenced, and the excitement spilled over, especially as the best players in the world were coming together on one platform. Distinguished cricketers from different countries would occupy the same space in a franchise dressing room, and best buddies from the same nation would square off against each other with no quarter asked and none given.

It was akin to Kerry Packer’s World Series Cricket (WSC) in the 1970s, but with a massive difference. The IPL had the blessings of the administration, unlike the WSC, and brought together the crème de la crème from across the globe as well as young and promising Indian talent on an unexpectedly higheyeball platform on which to perform and impress.

But nothing, not even the World T20, had prepared India for the IPL. The glamour quotient, especially in the first few years when cricket was not the only headline act, was unimaginably high. The lights, the singing and dancing, the buzz and electricity, all appealed to a wider audience, beyond the traditional cricket followers. Suddenly, families had a new way to enjoy their evenings, other than visiting parks and beaches and movie halls. It was three hours of unfettered entertainment with results guaranteed, and inevitably, newer fans got hooked to the game. To keep them involved and interested, there was a lot of other action around the cricket. Even early into Season 1, you knew that the IPL had surpassed the wildest of expectations and was here to stay.

Even as MS and his team were turning the world upside down in South Africa, the IPL was announced with grand fanfare in Mumbai in September 2007. Several of the franchises had ‘icon’ players who came from the cities that had won the right to field teams. Sachin was the icon player for Mumbai Indians, Sourav for Kolkata Knight Riders, Viru for Delhi Daredevils, Rahul for Royal Challengers Bangalore, Yuvi for Kings XI Punjab. Chennai Super Kings and Rajasthan Royals didn’t have icon players but made spectacular acquisitions in MS and Shane Warne respectively. My franchise was Deccan Chargers, based out of Hyderabad.

I passed up on the icon player status because that meant receiving 15 per cent more than what the franchise paid for its most expensive player. I thought that the money could be used for two purposes—to augment the auction purse, and for the development of cricket at the grassroots level in Hyderabad. I had captained India A and had been the vice-captain of the Test team the previous year, but I hadn’t ever led a team full of international superstars. Naturally, I was very, very upbeat about the IPL. As the captain, I was looking forward to creating an impression, to getting the best out of top players from around the world, most of whom I had only played against.

The owners of our team ran a successful English newspaper, Deccan Chronicle, an iconic and indigenous Hyderabad product. They were not too clued into cricket, and had appointed Shishir Hattangadi, the former Mumbai player, and Vijay Mohanraj, the former Hyderabad opener, as directors of cricket to oversee operations. After I came back from the tour of Australia in late January 2008, Shishir and ‘Tony’ sir took me to a meeting with Mr T Venkattram Reddy.

I came away impressed with the vision he had for Hyderabad cricket as a whole, not just for Deccan Chargers in the IPL. Our aims and goals were in sync, and he entrusted the responsibility of running the franchise to me. I was involved in all matters cricketing, from getting Robin Singh on board as coach to identifying the physio, the trainer, and other members of the support staff, to working out the number of sets of match and practice clothing each member required. I was also deeply involved in the process of identifying players we should target at the auction, even though I wasn’t physically a part of the auction myself as I wasn’t an icon player. That was to prove both a good thing and not such a good thing.

We procured the services of several big names in world cricket—Adam Gilchrist, Andrew Symonds, Shahid Afridi and Chaminda Vaas, among others— but were caught unawares when it came to keeping in touch with the rapidly changing rules, which understandably were a work in progress. We suffered most when it came to uncapped players.

Initially, we were told that we could only pick players from our respective catchment areas, and ours was restricted to Hyderabad, Andhra and Orissa. As the tournament neared, the rules were constantly revised. I am not sure how clued in our CEO, J Krishnan, was, while we were playing the Test series against South Africa at home. By the time I came to know that uncapped players from beyond the original catchment areas could be approached, the damage had been done because some of the franchises had already snapped up the big domestic names. Thus, even though we had a strong overseas group and a pretty good crop of capped Indian players, we lost the opportunity of picking up some top uncapped names. Which, in turn, meant we were overly dependent on our foreign stars, who had experience of the format, and had fewer Indian players to bank on.

Despite this, I was optimistic of our chances. However, my first experience of the IPL wasn’t to be a memorable one.

My season ended after six games, and at a time when I was beginning to get a hang of the demands of the T20 format. We lost five of those matches, though four of them went down to the last over. After a poor start as a batsman, I found my bearings when I pushed myself up to open the innings. I made 37 not out as Gilly smashed a century in our rout of Mumbai Indians, then contributed 48 and 52 in the next two matches. It was during the course of my first T20 half-century, against Royal Challengers Bangalore, that I sustained an injury that was to terminate not just my season but also my honeymoon period with the franchise. I was early into the pull against Dale Steyn, and was pinged on my right hand. Even as I carried on, I knew that something was seriously wrong. An Xray the following day confirmed my worst fears—I had sustained a fracture, and my season was over.

If I had picked up the injury while playing for India or for Hyderabad, I would have spent the recuperation period at home. That’s exactly what I told our owners, but they felt that as the designated captain, I should travel with the team even if I couldn’t play. The idea appealed to me at the time, and I was a part of the team for the remaining eight games while Gilly took over as captain. Franchise cricket runs differently from international or first-class cricket. In the latter, once the captain is injured, the new skipper is entirely in charge; that’s how it has always been. The captain of an IPL franchise, as I was to realise later, was a more powerful and hands-on individual, but having had no prior taste of this, I transferred all leadership responsibilities to Gilly. I didn’t want to interfere in his decision-making because he was responsible for the results he produced and I had no intention of leading by proxy. In hindsight, that’s something I could have done differently. The owners had all along interacted only with me, and since they had allocated decision-making responsibilities to me, they were under the impression that it was I and not Gilly who was running the show. In IPL 2008, Deccan Chargers ended up at the bottom of the table with just two wins—one under me, the other under Gilly—from 14 games. I should have been firm and continued to take responsibility by controlling the reins instead of passing them fully over to Gilly, but international cricket had not prepared me for that possibility. Things might still have panned out the same way, I understand, but at least I wouldn’t die wondering. 

Very early in the piece, it became apparent that most of the franchise owners didn’t entirely understand what it took to run a cricket team. Apart from Chennai Super Kings and Rajasthan Royals, the other owners had very little knowledge of the intricacies of the sport. India Cements, the Chennai team owners, had had teams playing in the TNCA league for a long time and knew what running a cricket team entailed. Rajasthan Royals’ Manoj Badale knew the game and stepped back once he had handed over charge to Warne, not interfering in cricketing matters. Since most of the other owners weren’t well versed with the game, cricket invariably came second to the glamour associated with the IPL. They took pride in the fact that they ‘owned’ celebrity players.

Also, in the early years, there was a massive focus on after-parties, which the players were mandated to attend. I was definitely not comfortable with that idea. Every team had plenty of youngsters, and it was natural that they got excited about and distracted by the parties. I made my apprehensions clear to the owners and the CEO more than once. Almost two months of constant partying was not going to do any favours to the younger players in particular, but my appeals fell on deaf ears.

I watched from the sidelines as the team stumbled from one defeat to another. I felt desperate and helpless. There was no attempt to build a team culture, which is so important for winning matches and tournaments. The season couldn’t end soon enough, and as the last ball was bowled, the sense of disappointment deepened. We had some wonderfully talented individuals, but as a team we were poor on strategy and, I should concede, leadership. It came as no surprise to me when, a few months later, I got a call from the Chargers management informing me that they had decided to hand over captaincy duties to Gilly. I had seen the writing on the wall. I was disappointed only because I’d had grand ambitions of winning the tournament for the franchise, which was why I had given away the icon status. But nothing had gone right for us, and I personally didn’t succeed in making the owners understand how a cricket team should be run. 

As we approached IPL 2009 in South Africa, I was coming off a very good international season, and confident of extending my run in the 20-over game as well. However, I made a poor start with just 19 runs from the first four innings— one of them at No. 5—and was promptly dropped. Recalled for one more game, I was dismissed without scoring, and dropped permanently thereafter. To be honest, I am not sure why I was brought back in the first place. We were to play CSK in East London, and at the team meeting the previous night, I was told that I wouldn’t be playing. Those of us not in the eleven would generally hit the gym on match day, so I had a two-hour stint at the gym, went back to my room and was sleeping when I was woken up by a phone call informing me that I would be playing that evening. I told the team management that I was in no position to play, having exhausted myself at the gym, but they insisted that I should be in the team. The result was predictably disastrous.

By then, Darren Lehmann had come on board as coach with a fresh set of ideas, and Gilly was captaining the team very well. We had lost early momentum but the team environment was good, and that’s how we were able to bounce back and go all the way to the title.

I was happy to share my experiences with the youngsters in the team and help them out wherever I felt they needed assistance. I didn’t mope about being left out. I did my best to remain positive and respond to the requirements of the team, but there were roadblocks along the way. It was as if the representatives of the owners were deliberately trying to undermine me. My young family was travelling with me—Achintya was just five months old—but more often than not, they wouldn’t be booked on the same flight. Sailaja and the kids were made to wait at the airport for long periods before the designated car arrived to pick them up. These might seem like trivial issues, but they work on your mind constantly.

ut every cloud has a silver lining. The Chargers experience was a valuable learning for me in terms of what you should not do in franchise cricket. That has helped me immeasurably in my current stint as mentor with Sunrisers Hyderabad. The owners at Chargers, and I suspect several others, were resultoriented rather than process-driven. They were successful in their own fields, and felt that, having invested heavily in the players, the results had to follow instantaneously and automatically. Cricket doesn’t work that way, as everyone knows.Much has been said of my T20 batting, and I can’t disagree with most of it. However, and I am sure this will come as a surprise to many, I have a good T20 record for Lancashire. Alright, so I only played three matches for them, but I made 159 runs at an acceptable strike rate of 132.50. That stint was just a month after IPL 2009 ended. In Lancashire, I knew that as the overseas pro, I would get my chances and felt secure. In the IPL, apart from the first season where I was the captain and played six games in a row before getting injured, I didn’t play longer than four matches on the trot.

In those early days of 20-over cricket, a lot of us ‘touch’ players—Rahul, Sachin, Jacques Kallis included—took time to adjust to the demands of this version. I started off every season playing my natural game, but when I was dropped and then recalled, I veered from my strengths and tried to impress others by adopting a style totally alien to me. I tried cute shots, I tried to hit the ball hard, and that was definitely not my natural game. That’s what happened with me early in my one-day career too. I tried to bat like AB de Villiers when I should have tried to bat like Virat Kohli, if you get what I am saying. I ditched the game that had helped me reach where I had, and paid the ultimate penalty. My game was such that I had the best chance of being successful if I batted in the top three. If I had to come in in the tenth over, say, I would struggle. I was a timer of the cricket ball and when the field restrictions were in place, it was all about finding the gaps and picking up the boundaries. The harder the cricket ball, the more the opportunities for me to score quickly.

Until recently, I hadn’t paid much attention to ‘timing’, although it was a word I had grown up with. It wasn’t until someone recently asked me to define timing that I got down to analysing it.

The way I see it, timing is how the ball flows off your bat. The masters of timing are able to strike the ball from the sweet part of the bat more often than not because they ‘see’ the ball a fraction of a second earlier than the rest. Picking up the length stems from the cues the batsman garners—the way the bowler is running in and the position of his wrist at delivery. The sooner you pick up the length, the more time you have to play your shots—by more time, I am still only talking fractions of a second.

There is a subtle correlation between time to play your shots and timing. The latter effectively means imparting maximum power to your strokes without trying to hit the ball too hard. One of the clichés used for touch players is, ‘He hardly hit a shot in anger.’ That is as close to the perfect definition of timing as possible.

Can you work on timing? Absolutely. Again, like most things in cricket, it stems from muscle memory. Your timing is at its best when your head, torso, hands and feet are in perfect sync and balance biomechanically. If even one of those elements is out of kilter, your timing automatically suffers. You can hit the ball as hard as you like, and it will barely trickle off the square. That’s especially  evident on slow pitches, when your muscle memory works against you if it doesn’t make allowances for the lack of pace on the ball.

The synchronicity between the four key body parts is not a happy accident, it is a happy action. It comes through hours of practice. There will be days when you strike the ball beautifully, when you merely lay bat to ball and it races away. Those are the days you need to dissect carefully from a biomechanical perspective. Identify the position of the head, the torso, the hands and the feet. And replicate it in training so often that, from a deliberate and conscious effort, it becomes second nature. When you optimise biomechanics, the bat becomes an extension of the arms, the rhythm is mellifluous, the impact stunning. I enjoyed the feeling of the bat making contact with the ball, and the ball flying away faster than it arrived, even though all I appeared to have done was merely touch it.

But whenever I felt the need to establish myself in the IPL, I tried to do something different. I should have stuck to my game and played my shots along the ground, piercing the infield. Instead, I tried to become a power player. I started to step out to fast bowlers, I tried to make room and hit over the off-side. I looked to hit sixes, which was hardly my calling card. In trying to smash the ball, I was losing my shape. I was not getting myself into good positions to play proper shots. My desperation was to prove my undoing. That is something I try to impress upon players I work with these days. I use my example of what not to do when the going gets tough.

The biggest change as far as the IPL is concerned is that it is now cricket first and frills later. Equally importantly, having been involved with the tournament for more than a decade, I can assert that the owners are a lot more knowledgeable today. They know how the game is played, how a team needs to be built, and vitally, how to infuse confidence in the ranks when the team is not doing well. They understand that cricket doesn’t work like business, and the biggest names need not translate into trophies and titles. They have started to trust the professionals they have employed to deliver the goods and stay away from interfering in the day-to-day running of the team, including picking the playing eleven, as they used to in the early days.

It is also great to see the evolution of the format. Initially, it was construed as a batsman’s game, and the hard-hitting, ball-bashing batsman at that. But the quality of batsmanship has improved to the extent that it isn’t just the unorthodox or uber-creative batsmen who have thrived. Virat, Kane Williamson and KL Rahul are the best examples of how, if you trust your game and are aware of your strengths, you can be successful without resorting to superficially attractive shots or throwing the coaching manual out of the window. But the change that gives me the maximum pleasure is the impact of the bowlers in general, and the spinners in particular. The T20 game was supposed to sound the death knell for the spin bowler. But the spinners have developed so much and introduced so many variations that they have established themselves as the ultimate match-winners.

There is also a strong emphasis on data and analytics, on understanding patterns and preparing accordingly. T20 cricket has come a long way from what a lot of us perceived it to be. Now, much thought and planning goes into various aspects—the auction, diet, training, fitness, how to recover from the constant travel, how to stay fresh and focused despite the unending hustle and bustle. I am fortunate that, as mentor of Sunrisers Hyderabad, I am in a position to watch these developments from close quarters, and to guard players from falling into the same abyss as I had in trying times. There will always be sceptics, but as far as I am concerned, the IPL’s role in the continued evolution of Indian cricket cannot be exaggerated.