Excitement had been building throughout the day. The kids in our complex gathered at the ground, around which the three blocks of Nandanam Apartments in Abids, the first gated community in Hyderabad, had been constructed. It was 25 June, 1983—a day that would have a massive impact on our lives. As kids of that age were wont to do—I was eight and a half, and most of the others were about the same, give or take a year or so—we discussed the pros and cons of what lay ahead. Sagely, we all agreed that West Indies were the stronger team, but we weren’t losing faith in our heroes. ‘We will do it,’ we insisted, with a little trepidation but also optimism.

After India were bowled out for 183, we met at the ground again, confidence slightly deflated, dreams somewhat dimmed. Greenidge and Haynes, Richards and Gomes, Lloyd and Bacchus and Dujon. Surely, it was game over? Our idols had given it their all, but maybe it wouldn’t be enough against the might of the two-time defending champions.

Live television had just invaded our homes, and when Balwinder Sandhu sent Greenidge back with a peach, I went nuts. Instinctively, I raced to the balcony of our house. Almost magically, my friends appeared in their respective balconies, buzzing, all of us talking at the same time. It wasn’t pre-planned. We talked for a few seconds about the dismissal, and then rushed back to our living rooms to watch the match.

As Kapil Dev took a stunning catch, running backwards from mid-wicket to dismiss Viv Richards, who was threatening to take the trophy away from India, we went berserk. When another wicket fell, we ran to our balconies again and enacted the same routine. We did that over and over again as that Sunday evening gave way to a memorable night. By the time Mohinder Amarnath trapped Michael Holding in front, we were delirious. It wasn’t just Kapil Dev and his intrepid warriors lifting the World Cup on the Lord’s balcony; I felt as if I was there with them, snaking a tiny hand out to touch the trophy. I had already been consumed by the cricket fever, but it was when I watched our team lift the cup and bring so much joy to so many, that I fell completely in love with it. I dreamt, like many of us have done and still do, of winning matches for India, of being a Kapil Dev or a Sunil Gavaskar. I had no idea where all this would take me. All I wanted to do was play cricket, and then play some more.

While both my parents—nana Shantaram and amma Satyabhama—were doctors, my family had a strong connection to sports. My father had played for Osmania Medical College as an opening batsman and leg-spinner, while my maternal grandfather, Shri R Ramananda Rao, a leading management consultant, was a sports buff. From an early age, he tuned in to Radio Australia and the BBC to listen to Test match commentary. He also followed all major sporting action passionately via newspapers and the radio in an age when television was still unknown. He was a competent tennis player too, and went on to become the vice-president of the Andhra Pradesh Sports Council, and later, chairman of the Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh.

But as was the norm those days in middle-class families, there was a distinct slant towards academics. Our parents impressed upon my brother Ramakrishna (older to me by two years) and me the need to be good at our studies, to have a firm grounding from which to aspire for bigger things. They didn’t do so through words, but through their actions, which I understand now to be the most effective means of communication. Neither of them was particularly against sports, so long as it wasn’t at the expense of education. That was the first giant slice of good fortune that came my way.

Baba Krishna Mohan, my maternal uncle, used to play in the Hyderabad Cricket Association (HCA) league when I was a toddler. Baba uncle would have a huge influence over my career and become the well-intentioned mentor and guide I needed at that stage. Whenever my parents took me to Marredpally to my grandparents’ house—Shyam Vihar—over the weekends, Baba uncle would either be shadow-practising, knocking the tennis ball to the wall or batting against a hanging ball. I have absolutely no memory of this, of course, but I have been told that I used to crawl to the door and watch him go through his routine with a smile on my drooling face. As I left my crawling days behind, I dragged my plastic bat, an inseparable companion, behind me. This, too, I don’t remember.

My earliest cricketing memories are from when I was around five. All the kids my age at Nandanam took their little bats and tennis balls to the ground and started thrashing the ball around. It was nothing remarkable or out of the ordinary. In Hyderabad, as in most parts of the country, cricket was the number one sport even then, and scenes of children of various ages and sizes swarming the grounds were hardly a rarity.

Probably because I was one of the younger and smaller kids, people in our society went out of their way to pamper me. On the third floor of our B block, in flat 301, lived Mrs Khan, Pakistani cricketer Asif Iqbal’s cousin. When the Pakistan team visited Hyderabad to play against South Zone in January 1980, several of the players came over to the Khans’ place one night for dinner. Among them, apart from Asif Iqbal himself, were Javed Miandad and Zaheer Abbas. I was fast asleep when my mother roused me and took me upstairs. Mrs Khan sweetly told the Pakistan players about my cricketing exploits in the building, and made me take their autographs. I was half-asleep and didn’t recognise a lot of the players, but I was thrilled to meet international cricketers. By the time I reached the fourth standard, we were playing cricket with tennis balls and cork balls inside our compound, this block against that. Now, those games I remember vividly—competitive, hard fought, but without rancour or bad blood. In our battles, I would alternate between being Sunil Gavaskar and Kapil Dev—I also used to bowl medium pace at that time. The Khans had named me Little Gavaskar because they thought my technique to be solid. The name caught on once my friends began to find it difficult to get me out. I am not sure what Sunny bhai would make of this, but as a little boy, I got a massive kick out of being spoken of in the same breath as one of my heroes.

My school, Little Flower, was no more than five minutes from home. At the end of classes each day, I would watch the school team practise for a while before retreating to my world of cricket matches and homework at Nandanam. I had been a regular spectator at school practice for a week or so when Mr Jayaprakash, our physical education instructor, came up to me and said, ‘Why are you just sitting outside and watching them practise? Go ahead and join them.’ I was a little apprehensive, but also thrilled. 

Drill sir, as we used to call Mr Jayaprakash, made me take a few catches, and seemed reasonably impressed with my technique. I don’t know how but, apparently, I didn’t just catch the ball. I caught it in the manner in which the books recommended. And I hadn’t seen any of those books.

At Little Flower, the practice ground was a tarred surface, with a cement pitch sitting proudly in the middle. For the first month, apart from taking catches, my job was to get the poles and nets from Drill sir’s room before every practice session and erect them around the pitch. I’d dismantle them at the end of the evening and take them back to his room. I was one of four or five boys entrusted with that responsibility. In hindsight, that was my first exposure to, and lesson in, cricketing team work.

The month rolled along. Between classes, pitching the poles and nets, taking catches, going back home for ‘friendlies’ at Nandanam, and then getting homework out of the way, I had my hands full. But I enjoyed every second of it. I was getting to do what I wanted; I did like to study, and I loved cricket. What more could a kid that age ask for?

My batchmate Karthik and I were the only fourth-standard students at school practice, and once we dismantled the nets, we threw down balls at each other for a few minutes of batting practice. We had just entered month two with the senior school team’s training sessions when Drill sir asked me to pad up and bat. I felt a little tingle of anticipation as I awkwardly made my way to the batting crease. Up against me were older and stronger boys, and they were going to attack me with a cricket ball that I hadn’t ever played against. But I had no fear. I played confidently, getting behind the ball with ease to defend, though I was too thin to strike it with any force. Drill sir liked what he saw and pencilled me in for the Under-11 school team. Karthik too was picked and we were on top of the world. From the sixth standard onwards, I travelled with the school team to play matches in the city, winning a few, losing a few. I didn’t immediately find a place in the playing eleven, but I distinctly remember carrying the kit to the bus stop on our trips to other schools. Every Saturday, after school hours, we would walk as a team from Little Flower to All Saints School, which boasted a strong cricket team. We enjoyed the one-kilometre walk, chatting non-stop and often over each other. A fantastic camaraderie bound us together, both off and on the field.

But Little Flower was a school that didn’t compromise on education. Our Unit Tests generally fell on Saturdays, and if we had a match that day, even if it was the final of a competition, we had to forfeit it. ‘No cricket at the expense of tests, not a chance’, was the message that was driven into us even at that young age. I didn’t mind it all that much, not that I had much of a choice. I did enjoy going to class and writing exams, and while we were a little disappointed, especially when forced to miss a ‘big’ match, we knew that more matches were in store for us.

The first time I played for Little Flower was when I was in the seventh standard. I was delighted that Parth Satwalekar, my classmate since the first standard, had broken into the eleven along with me. Our team practised together for an hour and a half, and then Parth and I would troop across to his house, which wasn’t that far from either my house or our school. Our families were very close; Parth’s grandmother was the first gynaecologist in Hyderabad and she delivered my father. Also, as in my case, his parents were doctors. We gravitated towards each other, and while we went our different ways professionally, we remain the best of friends. His parents had a huge house in Abids, and all of us boys would assemble there and play cricket well into the evening, under the yard lights. That was my first experience of floodlit cricket.

I am a firm believer in turning points. I was playing cricket, I was studying, I was doing the usual things for a twelve-year-old, when I was exposed to structured private coaching for the first time. Every Sunday, my mother, Ram and I would visit my grandparents and spend the day with them. The front yard at Shyam Vihar was laid with cement, facilitating our cricketing sessions. As my cousins congregated for summer vacations, we would play tennis-ball cricket throughout the day. My uncle would tell me later that it was during these sessions that he fell in love with my strokeplay and my style and spotted something special in me. He wanted me to receive formal coaching. Luckily for me, adjacent to Shyam Vihar, the St John’s Cricket Coaching Camp had just been set up, coinciding with my summer holidays at the end of the seventh standard. My uncle enrolled me immediately, and took me to the camp on the first day of its launch.

You need someone in your life, especially in your formative years, who believes in you more than you do yourself. My uncle saw something in me that few had seen at that stage, and he was sure I was cut out for bigger things. He wasn’t trying to live his dreams through me, but he did believe that I wasn’t your average schoolboy-cricketer. He did everything within his means to facilitate my development as a batsman, as a cricketer, as a person.

Until I joined the St John’s camp, our summer holidays were spent playing cricket at my grandparents’ house. I had attended camps at LB Stadium during the summer vacations after the fourth and fifth standard exams, but all I had done for a month was shadow practice. Mr Sriramulu, a kabaddi coach, taught us cricket. But otherwise, the holidays were spent playing in our grandparents’ front yard. My brother Ram was a fast bowler at heart even though he used to open the batting for our apartment’s team; he was a huge fan of Imran Khan, Richard Hadlee, Ian Botham and Kapil Dev. I was largely interested in batting. I did bowl some medium pace, but if I could, I would bat the whole day.

My uncle was a left-arm medium-pacer who was then playing in the HCA league. He was coached by AR Bhupathi, a leading coach in Hyderabad, whose wards at that time included MV Narasimha Rao, P Jyothiprasad, V Manohar and John Manoj. St John’s camp was started by Narasimha Rao (Bobji sir), who had just led Hyderabad to the Ranji Trophy title. Bobji sir and his other Andhra Bank colleagues, Jyothi sir, John sir and Manohar sir, were all established cricketers with vast knowledge, wisdom, and a passion for honing young talent.

On my first day at camp, Bobji sir asked me to show him my grip. I was nervous and ended up fumbling. My uncle was furious; he didn’t say a word, he just bowled to me for more than two hours. It was a chastening experience. At the camp, I was naturally paired with the juniors, and we practised in the mornings. I shifted to my grandparents’ house to avoid the early-morning commute, leaving the comfort of my own home for the first time, at the age of 12. Even though I was with family, I felt out of place, and in a week’s time, I became homesick and started crying. I desperately wanted to go back home. My uncle was not amused.

But within a couple of days of returning home, a feeling of emptiness took hold of me. I knew what I was missing—the routine of waking up early, walking across to the camp, listening to Bobji sir and the other coaches. I told my mother that I wanted to go back to the camp, but my uncle wasn’t keen on having me back, not after I had left in tears just a few days earlier.

My father managed to convince my uncle to take me back, and I thoroughly enjoyed the rest of the summer. I practised in the mornings with the juniors, and in the evenings I watched the senior boys practise, from my grandparents’ balcony. Jyothi sir saw me standing on the balcony day after day and finally asked me to join the senior practice session.

After bowling for long periods during the evening session, just as the camp was winding down, he asked me to pad up and bat. And I did, confidently and fearlessly, against older, quicker bowlers. From that day on, I practised with the juniors in the morning and returned in the evening to rub shoulders with the seniors. Once school resumed, I took a bus to the camp for the 3.30 p.m. practice on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays. But it was too demanding a schedule to maintain, and was shelved after three months. By then in the eighth standard, I registered with Marredpally Colts Cricket Club, who featured in the D3 division of the HCA league. I didn’t get to play a single match most of that first season. All I did was score the games. MP Colts were a pretty good team and it was hard for me to break into the playing eleven. But despite knowing that there was little chance of playing, I didn’t miss a single game. I landed up on time every Sunday, to score and ferry drinks to the middle. Randolph Sallins, who ran the club and was a likeable man, was so taken with my commitment that he made place for me in the eleven in the last match of the season. I responded with 52, and that made Uncle Randy happy. We earned a promotion to the D1 division the following year, and by the time I was in the tenth standard, we were playing in C1.

I had my fair share of success, even making 70-odd when I was down with high fever (I had played on Uncle Randy’s insistence). But I was often run out and worried about what my uncle would have to say about it. His expectations of me far exceeded my own. He was very, very serious about my cricket—more than my parents, more than even I was.

Outside of playing in the HCA league, the Under-13 and Under-15 school cricket scene gave me a chance to make a name for myself. Parth and I had become regulars in the school team from when we were in the seventh standard, with Parth as captain and me as his deputy. When I was 13, I played for the Hyderabad team in the South Zone Under-13 tournament for the Nutrine Trophy. The tournament was in Vijayawada, and although my uncle would have loved to come with me, he couldn’t. He was getting married in Tirupati the same day. It wasn’t until the following morning that my uncle and parents came to know that I had made 150 against Kerala. Deccan Chronicle had given the knock good coverage, with ‘Laxman Slams 150’ in red type. My uncle told me that my parents were as delighted as he was to see my name in the newspaper. I went on to make 92 in the final against Tamil Nadu before being bowled by Hemang Badani. Hyderabad lost the game, and it was the first time I realised that my individual contribution had little meaning if it didn’t result in a win. But that tournament introduced VVS Laxman to the cricket world, beyond my family and my school. It was a huge moment in my cricketing journey.

Within the Hyderabad circles, All Saints loomed as our final frontier. Week after week, we trooped across to play their very strong team in their backyard. Sometimes we ran them close, but victory always proved a step too far until we were in the tenth standard. By then, several of us had played together for a couple of years and we had evolved into a fairly competitive outfit. It was in a competition for schools under the Montfort Group of Institutions that we finally put it past All Saints and went on to win the tournament. It’s hard to say what gave us more satisfaction—lifting the trophy or defeating All Saints for the first time.

The step up to Hyderabad Under-15 was a natural process, and I was then picked to attend a South Zone Under-15 camp in Chennai. We stayed in the dressing room of the MA Chidambaram Stadium in Chepauk during the 20-day camp. The heat and the humidity were unbelievably high, and we were cooped up in the dressing room with no air-conditioning and only a few scattered ceiling fans. But I saw Robin Singh and met WV Raman for the first time.

Parth and I had joined St Mary’s Junior College to pursue the equivalent of the 11th and 12th standards in Andhra Pradesh. I had done extremely well in my 10th standard exams—first in the state in science with 98 per cent, and 83 per cent overall, pulled down only by my weakest subject, Telugu. All through school, science had been my favourite subject, with math a close second. But when it was time for junior college, my father suggested that I take up Civics– Economics–Commerce. I am not sure if this was some sort of a test—my father had two clinics and it was widely believed in his circles that Ram and I would become doctors and take over one clinic each—and perhaps he was relieved when I told him that I wanted to enrol for Biology–Physics–Chemistry because my goal was to become a doctor. It seemed the most obvious thing to say at that point.

In the first month of junior college, I started to prepare for EAMCET, the engineering and medical entrance exam, which was still two years away. But after that first month, the next time I went to college was to pick up the hall ticket ahead of the exams. Cricket had taken over my life—I played in the Hyderabad Under-16 team and finished as the second highest run-getter, behind Mohiuddin Zaki. PR Man Singh, the HCA secretary and the manager when India won the World Cup in 1983, fast-tracked Zaki and me to the Under-19 state team, which meant a lot of state cricket and plenty of competition.

During the summer camp at the end of the first year of junior college, John Manoj sir wanted me to play in the A1 Division, for a two-day competition for East Marredpally Cricket Club, a fairly strong team. We were just about winding up practice when Arshad Ayub walked into the nets. Arshad bhai had by then played for India, and we had huge respect for him. He was on the lookout for a batsman to play for his club, Ensconce CC. John sir told me to pad up and face the bowlers, so I could catch Arshad bhai’s eye. Arshad bhai loved the way I batted, and asked me to play for Ensconce.

Ensconce’s ‘home ground’ was the Indian Air Force ground in Balanagar —it was beautiful, with plenty of trees surrounding the playing field. Playing there, and for Ensconce, hastened my learning process. Arshad bhai was busy with Hyderabad state team commitments, and Ashok bhai took over as captain. As had been my routine in my early days with any team, the initial tasks involved putting the mat in place and removing any puddles that might have formed if it had rained. I didn’t realise it at that time, but all these ‘noncricketing’ activities helped build character and team spirit. My father told me later that he used to make surprise visits to Balanagar and watch me from a distance. He didn’t often see me bat, but he was very happy to see me uncomplainingly and enthusiastically scooping water off the outfield whenever a match was affected by rain.

When I did play, it was a great experience, standing at second slip, between Arshad bhai at first slip and Abdul Azeem at third. Arshad bhai was an India international, Azeem bhai had played for South Zone, and the knowledge they possessed and passed on was just incredible. The more I look back, the greater is my conviction that there was some powerful force that shaped my journey, allowing me to run into and interact with people who were able to make a potent impression on a young mind.

When it was time for the EAMCET exam, I was on the verge of playing for the Hyderabad Ranji Trophy side, and had already caught the eye of the Indian junior selectors. The exam, in 1992, clashed with the India Under-19 national camp in Bangalore.

My father had lost his father when I was 10 years old, and it had changed his outlook on life. My paternal grandfather, Shri Jagannath Shastry, was a Bhagavad Gita teacher, a scholarly and erudite man who exuded divinity and goodness. He was in hospital with a broken leg after a fall at home, and before leaving his mortal coil, called my father over one night. He embraced him tightly, almost going into a trance, and shouted ‘Vijayam, Vijayam, Vijayam’ followed by ‘Aham Brahmasmi, Aham Brahmasmi, Aham Brahmasmi’ before peacefully breathing his last. This was to make a lasting impression on my father, and he dedicated himself to the service of humanity from that moment on. My grandfather had allowed his children to make their own choices. After his death, my father’s attitude underwent a drastic change. When Ram said he wanted to pursue a career in engineering, my father was more than happy to allow him to do his thing. I wanted to play cricket, but I didn’t have the courage to tell him that.

My father was passionate about medicine—he worked late into the night and woke up early in the morning to read journals to keep himself abreast of the latest developments in the field. During his unannounced visits to my cricket matches, he must have seen in me a similar passion for cricket, because while he didn’t overtly push me towards it, he did not ever discourage me from chasing my dream.

It came as no surprise then, when he bought me a flight ticket from Bangalore to Hyderabad and back so that I could write my exam and rejoin the camp without missing more than a day’s activities. I cleared the entrance exam and was poised to join Gandhi Medical College. I was mechanically doing what I thought was expected of me—complete my degree in medicine, follow in my parents’ footsteps and serve society as a doctor.

But my uncle would have none of that. He was keen that I continue to play cricket. I had doubts about my ability, but my uncle was confident that it was only a matter of time before I played for the country. ‘He has come this far, don’t push him into medicine’, was the constant refrain that wore my father down. In my heart of hearts, I desired the cricketing path, but I wasn’t sure if that was an option. But when, as a family, we decided after much persuasion from my uncle that I would put my education on hold for a while, I was very happy. That’s when my father told me, ‘The profession doesn’t glorify you, you glorify the profession. We are serving Mother India through medicine, you serve her through cricket.’

I knew even then that I would never forget those words.
