Glamour is the word most often associated with being an India cricketer. A life of fame and money, glitz and bling, attention and adulation. It’s a journey that is the envy of many, and it’s a journey all of us are grateful for. But, of course, there is more to being a professional sportsperson, and especially a cricketer in our country, than just these things.

Whether we like it or not, we are looked up to as role models. We are not only expected to be on top of our game but also on our best behaviour, and the two don’t always go together in the heat of battle. Having said that, we have always been mindful of the fact that we are ambassadors of our great country, and therefore need to conduct ourselves in a manner befitting that status. When things go well and you enjoy your own as well as the team’s performance, everything seems well worth it—the early days of uncertainty and anxiety, the long months spent away from family, living out of a suitcase, grappling with pressure and loneliness. But when things don’t pan out, like they didn’t in the early stages of my career, you begin to question the process and your own worth. Fortunately, blessed with a strong support system at home and my own spiritual beliefs from which I derived considerable strength and comfort, I was able to overcome nagging self-doubts to find a second, then third and fourth wind.

As kids, when you knock a football around or hurl a cricket ball with strength and skill, you are doing no more than your neighbour, your classmate, your friend might be doing. It is only when you aspire to become a professional cricketer, like in my case, that the challenges begin to surface. By the time you approach your teens, you dream of taking up the sport as a career, and all you see are the possibilities, not the roadblocks. That is the beauty of being young. As they say in cricketing parlance, you only look at the gaps, not the fielders. That’s not the reality, of course. For every 10,000 kids aspiring to play for the country, only a dozen or so make it beyond the school level. The road to higher grades of the sport is fraught with plenty of hurdles—stiff competition from peers, pressure from parents to put education above sport, lack of commitment and innate fire. I have played with and against so many talented and hard-working cricketers during my formative years, but for one reason or the other, they couldn’t make the next step up. That can be dispiriting; it’s the toughest part of this game.

The positive, however, is that even if you are unable to play for the country, if you continue to play the game with passion, it will make you a better person. It will prepare you for the challenges of life, it will offer you the opportunity to build your character. If you give yourself the chance, so will cricket. I have seen some talented colleagues messing up their entire life at a very young age because they were so emotionally involved in the outcome that when the dice didn’t roll their way, they didn’t know what to fall back on. That’s where education plays a big role. Sport and academics can and must go side by side. One discipline helps you do better in the other. Especially if sport ceases to be a career option, education will be your valued ally all through your life. Once you go through the grind and eventually do succeed in playing for the country, the feeling of entitlement is exploded very quickly. Making it to the Indian team might appear to be the end of an arduous journey when, in actual fact, it is just the beginning of a road less travelled. Every series is like an examination that you are ill-prepared for—there is no syllabus, no study material.

There is so much competition till you establish yourself, that until you are a certainty in the team, you feel the need to keep proving—to yourself, to your mates, to the people who trusted and picked you, to your family and fans—that you belong at that level. And then creeps in the danger of losing the very thing you started playing the game for: the sheer pleasure of it. You tend to forget why you picked up the bat in the first place.

Once you do prove yourself over a period of time, the expectations from others start to grow and you feel the need to live up to them. Fortunately, I realised reasonably early that it was important to only think about the things that I could control and that helped me play with a freer mind. In so many obvious and not-so-obvious ways, 2000 was the year when Indian cricket turned the corner. The beginning of the year was tempestuous with the match-fixing scandal. By the end of the year, we had a new captain, a new crop of players and importantly, our first overseas coach, who came without any baggage and with cricket as his only agenda.

Prior to John Wright taking charge, the life of a first-class cricketer in India hung by a slender thread. If you made loads of domestic runs, you might get a chance to play against a visiting side. It was your chance to impress, and you knew that if you didn’t succeed in that game, all the success that had preceded that failure counted for nothing. You had to go back to ground zero and start afresh, stack up performances and hope for another shot at a visiting side, hope that the next time, you would be able to shake off the pressure to perform, and actually deliver the goods. I was lucky that I made runs against touring sides, but there were a lot of other players who made tons of domestic runs but were quickly put out to pasture after one isolated failure against an overseas team in a warm-up encounter.

Once John came in and found his feet, he and the selectors arrived at a pool of 30 players or so, all of whom were in contention for a place in the Indian side. Your fate was no longer dictated by one poor outing. There were back-ups for all skill sets, and each of the 30 felt that he was wanted. Until John and the formation of the central pool, there was so much insecurity among the fringe players that failure was almost guaranteed before an ‘important’ game. Having a pool of 30 freed us up and took away a lot of the negativity.

Also, until John arrived, communication had been a no-no in Indian cricket. It is especially essential to let young players know where they stand. If the selectors, coaches and senior players don’t interact with a newcomer, he comes under tremendous mental pressure, not knowing what his role in the side is. In my early days, that was an issue. Till I played for India, I was a regular in first-class cricket for various sides. Once I broke through into the India team, I was in for a couple of matches, then out. I didn’t know where I needed to improve, what I needed to work on, how I could become a better and more valued player. It ate me up so much that my roommates complained that I mumbled angrily in my sleep.

Clearly, I wasn’t alone in reacting like this. That’s why, as we grew older and fell into the ‘senior’ category, Sachin, Anil, Viru, Zak and I made a conscious effort to ensure that newcomers were made to feel comfortable. Sachin was brilliant in that regard. He knew that the youngsters were in awe of him and reluctant to approach him, so he took the first step towards breaking the ice. I have seen how youngsters reacted when Sachin sought them out and spoke to them. Suddenly, their confidence levels increased, they immediately felt at ease, and they could concentrate on their cricket without worrying about treading on toes or ruffling feathers in the changing room. Again, that was missing in my first four years with the Indian side.

Things are different now, of course, and that is where the IPL has played a massive part. Young players are exposed to superstars of the game for at least two months every year, sharing a dressing room, watching them prepare, understanding their mindset, asking questions and readying themselves for what lies ahead. The turnaround in the attitude of the young Indian cricketer is one of the biggest positives to have emanated from the IPL.

The early part of my cricketing journey belonged in an entirely different era compared to how things are now. It was a time when awareness—of diet and nutrition, of fitness and communication—had yet to seep into our system. Technology had yet to revolutionalise the world. It wasn’t like we missed anything, because there was nothing to miss, but what is commonplace now was unheard of then. Like Skype, for instance. Or FaceTime.

In my days as a bachelor, travelling was the best off-field part of playing cricket. The first trip away from Hyderabad was a reality check, an eye-opener. In India, a majority of us are pampered and looked after by our parents. Unless you are in a hostel, all your needs are taken care of, you seldom have to do things by yourself. Cricket taught me at an early age how to take care of myself. The fallbacks are limited. Agreed, the team manager handles the logistics, but unlike at home, there are a lot of decisions that you need to make on your own. You become independent because there is no other option. If you didn’t look after yourself, no one else will. Travelling teaches you how to handle success and failure. It is part of character-building.

Once you start playing for the country, you are constantly on the road, be it within India or overseas. You are a nomad, with no stability in your life. All you see are different cities, hotels, airlines, grounds. It is play-travel-play, constantly eating out, experimenting with different cuisines and cooking styles. It becomes important to adjust to new environments rapidly, and that was a challenge for me because I was a vegetarian and my options were very limited during my early days with the Indian team.

I distinctly remember the Caribbean tour of 1997 when we arrived in Kingston for the final Test. As I flipped through the menu in our hotel, I found practically nothing that I could eat. I called up room service and asked for a vegetable sandwich. It came a half-hour later, with a thick slab of meat adorning it. There was no point in getting worked up because in Jamaica at the time, I was probably a novelty—a vegetarian. So I went down to the kitchen, talked to the chef and explained what I wanted, as best as I could. When it finally came, it tasted so good that the drama preceding its arrival was well worth it.

Things understandably got better with time and food ceased to be a problem. On our 2003–04 tour of Australia, I remember, Irfan Pathan was always on the lookout for Indian food. I urged him to try out other cuisines, and Irfan did eventually step out of his comfort zone. I had come to understand by then that if you are fussy about what you will and won’t eat, it could become a huge problem. I remain a vegetarian, but from only eating sandwiches when I started travelling overseas, I graduated to pasta and other vegetarian options. I focus on food so much because I remember falling into unhealthy habits without realising it. If no Indian food was available, I used to just eat a pizza because that was the only other vegetarian choice. You made do with what you could, without being aware of the finer nuances of diet and nutrition, and your fitness levels were impacted adversely. In those days in India, our exposure was restricted to Indian and possibly, Chinese food. Unlike now, there was no Italian or Thai cuisine to gorge on. After a hard day’s work on the field, you want to have a nutritious meal, which wasn’t forthcoming. But how can that be an excuse for non-performance? ‘I couldn’t eat properly last night, so I couldn’t concentrate on my batting today.’ ‘Oh yes? Then sit at home and eat all you want.’

We knew nothing about gluten-free diets, or of the importance of carbs and proteins. There was no exposure to supplements, and a lack of knowledge of the value of, say, soya and tofu as vegetarian protein options. It wasn’t until I started to talk to players from the opposition that I became alive to the world of possibilities when it came to fitness, diet and nutrition. That’s why I am convinced that the results we produced as a team in those early days were all entirely down to our skills. The western teams, to use the term loosely, were a lot more scientific in their approach even then. We, by contrast, relied on our basic skill sets until John’s entry.

Travelling overseas is a double-edged sword, and it takes on different hues at various stages of your career as well as your life. As a newcomer, it is exciting and exhilarating. You see new places and make new friends, some of them for life. But as you get older, and become a husband and then a father, things gradually get tougher.

That’s where a strong family support system is invaluable. I am blessed to have what I do. Even when Sailaja and the kids didn’t travel with me, I knew they were safe and comfortable, and that lifted a load off my shoulders. Not all my teammates had that luxury, and I have seen how some of them struggled to balance their professional and personal lives. Even when we were at home between matches, we ended up spending at least five-six hours at practice, and were visitors in our own homes. In the pre-Skype era, whenever we guys met after a break, we would ask each other, ‘Did your kid recognise you when you went home?’ It was a running joke, but believe me, it wasn’t that funny. The scary part of travelling is when you are not doing well personally, and the team is struggling too. The mood is sombre, and you don’t know who to turn to for some comfort. How do you share your concerns, your worst fears, your constant nightmares? And with whom? Your roommate is pretty much in the same boat, so how do you cope? You feel very, very lonely. In India, no matter which city you are playing in, you have lots of friends. You don’t play so often in England or Australia or South Africa, but even if you do have friends there, they are hesitant to come and meet you because they know you are feeling low, and they are not sure how you will receive them.

It becomes imperative then, to cultivate friendships abroad as well, with those who can help you get away from a negative emotional space and take your mind off cricket. I was fortunate that when Sailaja travelled with me, she never discussed cricket when I got back from the ground. Gradually, I realised that though cricket is important, it is not the only thing. But when you are single, you end up spending time around your teammates in the evenings too, and it becomes impossible to not reflect on the day’s play. For comfort and words of wisdom, where do you go?

Again, I am referring to a time when there was no Internet. Our per diems weren’t sufficient for us to make expensive international calls back home—I remember writing letters to my father from South Africa in 1996–97—and in the darkest moments, I felt like someone was squeezing my heart tightly. It was then that I missed my family and friends the most. A deep, dark, long tunnel used to stare at me, without even a flicker of light in sight. And especially when the silent treatment was on from the team management, I had to fight through it on my own.

I remember spending several sleepless nights, anxious and tense and nervous and wondering what the future held. Or whether there was a future at all. I dreaded going back to domestic cricket because there was a huge gap between being an India player and a domestic player, from the practice facilities and the grounds on which we played, to the hotels in which we stayed, the manner in which we travelled and the attention that we got. At that time, the only opportunity to make a career out of cricket was by playing for the country. There was no professional help to turn to when it came to mental conditioning. You had to work things out, address your own problems, rejuvenate yourself, and start performing. The more I reflect on that, the more I admire players like Kapil paaji and Sunny bhai, who had little to fall back on in terms of expertise in coaching, fitness, rehab, or nutrition. They didn’t have trainers or physios, and yet, in the unforgiving world of international cricket and against better equipped sides, they remained outstanding for so long.

The key to doing well overseas, I have always believed, is to embrace the local culture, to familiarise yourself with the place, the people, the traditions. Go out and distract yourself, improve your knowledge, broaden your horizons, and be open-minded. As a team, we were happy to go on outings together. In New Zealand, it was the skywalk in Auckland, or rafting. In Zimbabwe, we walked with the tigers and visited Victoria Falls. We surfed on the lovely Caribbean sea. It exposed us to new challenges and adventures we might never have embarked on had we not been part of the Indian cricket team.

Until they came to India in 2001 under Steve Waugh, Australia carried a siege mentality with them, not to mention hundreds of cans of baked beans and the like. They kept to themselves, they didn’t go out and mingle, and it reflected in their performances. Steve changed that thinking, and as the Aussies got around a bit and began to understand India and our people better, they played better cricket here. That is no coincidence.

I am happy that for the modern player, things have changed so dramatically. Technological advancements have made communicating with family back home so much easier. There is access to better facilities in every aspect. But as welcome as these developments are, none of them guarantee performance. In that regard, nothing has changed, and nothing will. At various stages of your career, just like in life, the aspirations and therefore the hurdles to overcome are different in both character and magnitude. Your dreams are initially modest—break into the school team, score runs. Gradually, as you move up the ladder, you retrain your sights. The India cap becomes allconsuming, and once you achieve that, you want to justify having that honour conferred on you. Then, you want to contribute meaningfully, so that the team benefits from your presence.

Once you have established yourself, you must live up to your own expectations and those of your team. That’s what matters. I am not belittling what the outside world wants of you, but as I said before, it is impossible to live up to what everyone asks of you. You want to perform at your best every time you are on the field, but that is humanly impossible. There will be times when you are laid low by injury. I firmly believe that physical injury first takes root in the mind. When the mind experiences a burnout, the body becomes more susceptible to injuries.

I remember three distinct phases when I grappled with bouts of negativity that threatened to tear me apart. Following the first round in 2000—when I was dropped midway through the home series against South Africa, which made me wonder if it was worth going through all this—the second time was after the non-selection for the 2003 World Cup, when I almost called it a day. The blues returned for a third time in 2007 and there was no discernible reason for it, except that I was being weighed down by the pressure—possibly self-inflicted— of having to go out and prove myself day after day.

I was lucky that I had the opportunity to rediscover myself, to find my mojo again. I also believe that the spiritual quotient in my life helped me no end. There are well-documented stories of sportspersons going into depression. Every professional sportsperson, indeed every individual, goes through these periods when nothing seems to matter anymore, when you find yourself in a sea of darkness, waves of anguish washing over you, over and over again.

Perhaps it was the stigma of being labelled weak that prevented us from discussing this even amongst ourselves. Perhaps the absence of a professional support structure for mental conditioning forced us to deal with it on our own. We had to appeal to our inner strength, and I can’t shake off the thought that somehow, we Indians are blessed with that extra strength to cope with such dark periods. Most of the players I played alongside were religious and that probably  also helped with mental rehabilitation. I don’t know if I was depressed in 2000. Or 2003. Or 2007. I am not sure what word I should use to describe my state of mind. All I know is that it was deeply frustrating, a constant inner battle that, by
the grace of God, I was able to overcome again and again.

It doesn’t help, of course, that you are trying to lead a private life in full public glare. Everything happens in front of others, every little event is scrutinised and discussed and dissected. Of course, everybody goes through periods of self-doubt and uncertainty, but privately, without being exposed in front of the world like public figures are. As cricketers, our lives are an open book. You cannot be your normal self at most times when in public spaces. You have to be the perfect person, so much so that some of us are almost forced to become actors. There is an image affixed to you, and you have to live up to that image, whether it’s the real you or not. I have come across cricketers who are so different behind closed doors from what they are in public that it’s like they have split personalities.

As I sat down to write this, I remembered something Venkatapathi Raju once recounted to me. By then, Venks was a household name in India, not just an international cricketer but also someone much loved because of his engaging, outgoing nature and his ability to make friends in a jiffy. He told me that once, when he was flying with the Indian team, a Bollywood star sought him out during the flight and hugged him because there were 200 people watching. But when he met the same star in private forums, he didn’t so much as receive a hello. I suppose split personalities aren’t exclusive to cricketers. Through ups and mainly through steep downs, during success and failure, occasionally a cloud of indescribable sorrow would descend upon me, and I am fairly certain something similar happened with many of my teammates too. We all found ways to confront it, deal with it, get it out of the way, without ever discussing it with each other. As sportspersons representing our country at the highest level, we were meant to be mentally tough. We were not supposed to have these negative emotions or, if we did, not show or share them, because they were considered signs of weakness.

You feel an urge, at this time especially, to prove yourself, to prove yourself right. When you are swamped by self-doubt or weighed down for no apparent reason and you somehow manage to thwart it with performances, then it’s all hunky-dory. But if you court repeated failure during this period, you are bound to give up at some point. Luckily for me, I was successful in my first few attempts at redemption, otherwise who knows what might have been.

Whenever I was dropped, I have had people come up to me at airports and restaurants and tell me, ‘Bad luck, I am sure you will bounce back.’ And others insisting, ‘You deserved to be dropped because these were your scores.’ Initially, I was taken aback. We are not taught how to deal with these intangibles. As a result, some players go from being afraid of failure to being afraid of success. When you start to stack up a few performances, people expect you to be successful, but there is no guarantee that you will do well all the time, I know of many players who avoided playing matches because they didn’t want to be branded a failure. Their logic—if you don’t play, you can’t fail. 

Ultimately, it all boils down to the love and passion you have for the game, how much you enjoy playing it, and the pride you take in achieving your goals. Sachin used to say that the only place where he could have lots of fun without any hindrance was when he was out there in the middle. As paradoxical as that might sound, he felt that no one could disturb him or intrude on his space when he was batting or fielding. It was the only time he could be himself. I have always been open to experimentation in a continued effort to become a better cricketer and a better human being. When I wasn’t in a great place mentally in the summer of 1999, my uncle—an HR professional—suggested that I undergo a three-day course in Neuro Linguistic Programming (NLP) in Mumbai. Eager for any straws, I clutched at this one desperately and came away with greater clarity.

One of the exercises involved a group of seven people shouting repeatedly and loudly into my ears by way of positive reinforcement. I wanted a triple hundred in first-class cricket against my name, and that was the message—‘I will score a triple hundred’—the group drilled into me for five minutes at a stretch. That had plenty to do, I am convinced, with my 167 in Sydney and 353 in Bengaluru against Karnataka in the Ranji Trophy semi-final, both within the next 10 months.

An NLP practitioner in Hyderabad once approached me with an offer of help. I took him at face value, and shared my fears and doubts with him. To my disappointment and no little anger, I discovered that in seminars and other public platforms, he revealed details of our confidential discussions as an endorsement of his abilities.

I had similar experiences later, with noted mental conditioners and counsellors, so I decided that the best way out was to work out things by myself. For technical inputs to help my batting, I still interacted with various coaches. Even if they claimed to have sorted out Laxman’s problems, that was fine because the idea was to improve my game. But when it came to matters of the mind, I became my own coach.

Apart from NLP, I read plenty of motivational books. I benefitted vastly from Tony Robbins’ Awaken the Giant Within, a book I recommend for every aspiring sportsperson. Actually, for every professional. I hunted down his videos and practised the various visualisation techniques he advocated. I used visualisation as a helpful tool. I also enjoyed listening to my father deconstruct situations. Every chat with him gave me greater clarity and insight. Most importantly, I gained a lot of strength and succour from my spirituality, and the support of my family. I drew strength from my daily morning prayers, from the Gita, and from being a devout follower of Shirdi Sai Baba and Satya Sai Baba. Even today, when I am grappling with a dilemma, I randomly open Sai Satcharita, which chronicles the life-story of Shirdi Sai Baba, and I find the answer to my problem on that exact page I have opened. I consider that a huge blessing from God.