The five-year deadline set by my parents to make my India debut could have become a millstone had I allowed it to. But given the support system I had—my parents, uncle, friends, coaches—I had no sense of negativity or desperation. This was the time to make my overriding ambition come true.

Once I passed out of junior college, cricket became everything. I did enrol for a B.Com degree in Wesley Degree College, but that was only to play cricket, for my college as well as in the inter-university competitions. Education took a backseat as I plunged into practice and matches. My life revolved around cricket. There were no movies, no family get-togethers, no evening outings with friends. It wasn’t a ‘normal’ adolescent phase, but it was by choice. Even when we had a function at home, I would leave for practice at the appointed time, without fail. My parents gave me the freedom to do so, because they realised that I was motivated.

I am sure that realisation came from watching me do the small things, like waking up at 4.45 a.m. when the alarm was set for 5 a.m. And from the larger commitments when it came to training—I had a rigorous schedule during the off-season, which entailed taking a bus to St John’s for practice from 6 a.m. to 9.30 a.m. There was a second bus ride to the camp in the evenings for another session from 3.30 p.m. to 6 p.m. This was followed by an hour of shadow practice in front of the mirror affixed to a huge Godrej almirah in one of the three bedrooms at home.

My parents never asked me how many runs I scored, or how many matches  I helped my team win. All they were interested in knowing was whether I was improving with each day, whether I was better—as a batsman, as a human being —today than I was yesterday. I shudder to think what might have happened had they been in my ear, seeking reports on my run-scoring and constantly reminding me of the five-year timeframe. They had allowed me to make my decision, and had concurred with it, and they could see how hard I was working. That was good enough for them.

Around all the practice, I played matches. Loads of them. I played for the Hyderabad Under-19, Under-21 and Under-23 state teams. Away from the nets at St John’s, I batted wherever I got the chance. Rajesh Yadav (not to be confused with the Hyderabad fast bowler of the same name), a very close friend, would bowl at me from 16 yards on a cement surface, for nearly two hours. I am not sure why he did it, but he would bowl his heart out, delivering the ball as fast as he could. This clearly took a toll on him, because, after a while, his right shoulder went bust.

Because of all this, I was progressing rapidly as a batsman. My game didn’t go up just one notch, I could see it improving by two or three levels. Then, when I turned 18, I joined Andhra Bank, a major decision that was to impact my cricketing life favourably.

It wasn’t as if I needed the job. But Andhra Bank, one of the strongest teams in the HCA league, played three-day games in the top tier. So far, I had only been playing in the two-day leagues for Ensconce. It was important to play three-day matches if I was to continue to improve, as well as catch the attention of the Hyderabad senior selectors.

Apart from Azzu bhai, every other Hyderabad first-class cricketer played in the HCA league. To play against them was certainly going to hasten my development. Additionally, the Andhra Bank side included several established Hyderabad cricketers—Kanwaljit Singh, the captain, Venkatapathi Raju, Vivek Jaisimha, Rajesh Yadav and Vanka Pratap. Among the young turks were A Nanda Kishore, the opening batsman, Narenderpal Singh, the fast bowler, and I. To have the opportunity at 18 to play against Kanwal bhai, Venkat and NP in the nets was a priceless gift.

Those days, teams in the HCA league were divided into Divisions A, B, C and D based on the performance of the clubs. Each division had three groups, each group had 18 sides, and most of them played 50-over matches. The A1 division was further divided into two—institution teams with all the Ranji Trophy cricketers, which played three-day matches, and the private clubs that played two-day matches. Only the A1 institution matches were played on turf, while all the other matches were played on matting surfaces.

The turf pitches were restricted to the Lal Bahadur Shastri Stadium, the Gymkhana Grounds, and NFC, ECIL, RRC and AOC. Most of the matting ties were played on the 12 pitches at the Parade Grounds, Hyderabad’s equivalent of the maidan in Mumbai, and on the ten tracks at the Bison Polo Grounds. A few games were also played at schools and colleges.

Players who played for institutions held jobs, but otherwise, there was no money in the sport. The secretaries of the clubs raised funds to manage the dayto- day affairs during the season, which ran from June to October. The two most prestigious local tournaments, apart from the league, were the Behram-ud-Dowla tournament (three-day matches) and the Kishan Prasad tournament (two-day matches). Additionally, there was the Senior Zonals for A Division players, and the Junior Zonals for players in Divisions B, C, D and a schools XI. At the end of the Junior Zonals, a combined Junior Zonal XI was picked to take part in the Senior Zonals.

Since the Parade Grounds were open to the public and just off the main road, people often stopped by to watch the matches. From time to time, my brother came over, and would later tell me how proud he felt when he heard strangers speak highly of my batting. Gradually, I began to recognise a few regular faces beyond the boundary, especially when I was batting. They were strangers, but they cheered with gusto when I played my strokes. My distant cousin, Hanumantha Rao, travelled an hour by bus to watch me play. In the Junior Zonals, our Schools XI played against Secunderabad XI, whose captain was Ravikumar. He was all praise for me even as I took on his bowlers, and told me that I was very stylish and that he hadn’t seen anyone so young batting with such authority. He went on to lead our Combined Junior Zonals XI when we played in the Senior Zonals. These were huge confidence boosters for a young man trying to find his feet in competitive cricket.

As I started to stack up runs in the highest division, people who mattered began to take notice. I could sense that there was a buzz around me, as a future Hyderabad Ranji player.

It was my uncle who persuaded me to join Andhra Bank. Apart from the formidable array of stars that lit up the team, in the ranks were Jyothi sir, John sir and Manohar sir, my childhood coaches. Now they could watch me play from close quarters and identify the areas I needed to improve in as I played a higher level of the game with players of a calibre I had never come up against. My eyes were firmly trained on the Ranji cap, but there was quite a distance to traverse. I continued to play league cricket in Hyderabad and represent the state age-group sides. I had made my Under-19 debut for Hyderabad when I was only 16, so I got to play four years of Under-19 cricket. Midway through my Under-19 stint, I was picked among the Hyderabad Ranji Trophy probables for the 1991–92 season. I didn’t make it to the squad, but I made the first cut. It was only a matter of time, I knew. I had just turned 17. Not to anyone’s great surprise, I was picked among the probables for the next season as well, after the early season ritual of the Buchi Babu tournament in Chennai and the Moin-ud-Dowla Gold Cup in Hyderabad. For the latter tournament, I was playing in the final for the HCA President’s XI, and we were up against the HCA XI, which comprised the first-choice Ranji players. Naren Tamhane, the national selector, was among those in attendance, having flown down to watch MV Sridhar in action. It was as if some force was at play, bringing him there and giving me a chance to impress him.

We had lost a couple of early wickets when I walked out to bat. Rajesh Yadav was bowling fairly quickly, but I hit him for four fours in one over, and went on to make 69. I was kicking myself for not having carried on, but my disappointment was instantly lifted when Tamhane sir came up to me and said, ‘Young man, you have great potential.’ It was just the kind of boost I needed. Tamhane sir repeated those words and spoke highly of my talent to my parents when they came to pick me up at the end of the day’s play. I could see they were delighted to hear from a neutral and influential source that their son was progressing in the right direction.

Unlike now, when there is so much emphasis on physical fitness and fielding, our routines were very basic. I bowled in the nets—I was a medium-pacer, and would go on to bowl with the new ball for India Under-19—and took lots of catches every day. But given the treacherous nature of the outfields, we hardly worked on our fielding. There were no dedicated fielding sessions, and definitely no fitness routines. The Andhra Bank team trained at the Gymkhana Grounds in Secunderabad. Typically, we would kick off a practice session with two or three laps of the ground, followed by five sprints and lots and lots of batting. There was an elementary gym where I lifted weights, but not in any structured fashion or under professional guidance. The concept of fitness was alien. It was just play, and more play.

At Little Flower school, I used to play lovely off and cover drives, but it was playing on the on-side that excited me. The ground was shaped such that the straight boundaries were long, but the square boundaries were shorter because the classrooms were on one side and the staffrooms on the other. If the ball hit the walls of either the classrooms or the staffrooms, it was what we called 2D— two runs declared, without any running between the wickets. I wasn’t strong enough to hit the ball for four down the straight field, so I settled for as many 2Ds as possible. Easy as pie, and no need to run either. That was pretty much the extent of the use of my wrists during my formative years.

As I entered the world of organised coaching, all my coaches repeatedly drilled it into me that the essence of batting was to play in the V. They held forth on the virtues of playing straight to minimise risk, and were not averse to using the stick to drive the point home. No, I am not exaggerating.

We were at an Under-13 camp at the Gymkhana Grounds, and the Hyderabad Ranji Trophy team was practising at the same time. Azzu bhai was batting, and I stood there in awe, watching him consistently whip balls from outside off to the leg side. By then, Azzu bhai had established himself in the Indian team, and had automatically become a hero for every young Hyderabadi kid who held a bat.

At our nets, one of the drills entailed playing the on drive with the full face of the bat, directing the ball to the right of the bowler on his follow-through, sending it scurrying between the bowler and mid-on. Perhaps inspired by my hero, I started to drop my elbow and use my wrist while playing the on drive. Sampath sir, our coach at the camp, was not amused. Determined to teach me a lesson to play in the V and not hit the ball across the line, he picked up a stump and walked up to me, intending to smack me on my triceps. I panicked and instinctively lifted my hand in self-defence, and the stump clattered into my elbow. For an instant, the elbow became numb. Then, the pain and the shock took over. I started shaking, then crying.

Coincidentally, Sampath sir was nearby when my father dropped me off at camp the following morning. He came up and asked my father if he had registered a police complaint. ‘I admire a coach and a teacher who does everything possible to make sure that his student is perfect,’ my father replied. ‘I salute you, sir. My son is blessed to have a coach and a guru like you.’ Sampath sir looked at him, open-mouthed.

Sampath sir was a wonderful guide and mentor who might have been tough on the outside, but had nothing but the best interests of his wards at heart. Perhaps because of that painful blow that served as a constant reminder, and because I was so focused on following the instructions of my coaches to the last letter, I stopped using my wrists after that morning. I remained technically correct, playing close to my body, driving down the ground, playing in the V. Until I was maybe 17 or so, I was what you would call a copybook player. Then, everything about my batting changed, very, very rapidly.

There wasn’t any one reason why I went from being an orthodox technician to a wristy batsman. The more I started playing matches and scoring runs, the more confident I became, and because I had grown so much as a batsman, I began to dominate the bowlers of my age group. I had begun to enjoy my batting a lot more, and my natural fluency came to the fore. Almost subconsciously, I began to challenge myself by playing strokes that weren’t in my repertoire.

I was playing a lot on matting pitches, and the mat at the St John’s ground was the kind that encouraged pace and bounce. My friend Rajesh had been testing me from 16 yards on cement pitches. When the ball comes to you quicker without bounce, you tend to use your elbow and play with a straight bat. When the ball gets big on you, you have to bring your wrists into play to keep it down. And a sudden physical growth spurt impacts your approach as well.

I was a little fella physically until 17, then I suddenly grew tall, but the length of my bat’s blade remained unaltered. From playing close to my body, I began to reach out to the balls away from my body because now I could. When you reach out to the ball with your upper body and hands but without much foot movement, you have to fall back on your wrists to avoid popping return catches to the bowler.

As we practised regularly, my coaches no longer told me to cut out wristwork. There was no hard slap on the wrist, no stump against the elbow. That was because I followed their instructions, especially at the start of the innings, when I played with the full face of the bat and in the V. It was only as the innings progressed and I saw the ball better, assessed the conditions and felt assured, that I used my wrists a lot more to find the gaps. Using my wrists gave me the option of playing with the field. The way my innings developed was like the blossoming of a flower—I would start off exclusively targeting the V in the early stages of the match, and later go on to play all around the park. That’s where the wristwork helped me, against the pacers as well as the spinners.

Whenever I batted at the Gymkhana, John sir and Manohar sir would stand by the sight screen and watch my every move. It was as nerve-wracking as writing an exam, because their scrutiny was intense. But I also knew that whatever they told me was in my best interest.

Having served time among the Hyderabad Ranji probables, I took my first concrete step towards an India cap—or so I believed—when I travelled with the team to Ludhiana for the Ranji semi-final against Punjab. I was 18 and a bit, and didn’t realistically expect to play in a match as high profile as a semi-final. Even so, a part of me was desperate for a debut and there was understandable anxiety and nerves. I began to ask myself if I really had it in me to succeed at the first-class level. My mind had grown a life of its own as we set out from Hyderabad to New Delhi by train. We had reached Kazipet when protests broke out. I don’t know what they were for, but our train returned to Hyderabad. We flew to Delhi the following day and drove down to Ludhiana. The nightmare journey had just ended when Arshad bhai informed me that I would be making my Ranji debut.

The first day of the match was washed out by the rains. Our team wasn’t keen on playing on the second day because of a damp spot on a good length area on the pitch, but Bishan Singh Bedi, the Punjab coach, convinced us that we should get on with the game. Left-arm spinner Bharti Vij exploited the spot to perfection and I was out on the second ball, caught at slip for a duck. ‘There go my chances,’ I thought, as I laboured back to the dressing room. I  was beyond consolation when MV Sridhar took me out to dinner that night. He pointed out that GR Viswanath had made a duck in his Test debut. But he followed it up with 137 in the second innings and went on to become a very successful batsman. ‘Mark my words, you will too,’ he told me. In the second innings, promoted from No. 6 to No. 4, I only made 17 before falling leg before to fast bowler Arun Bedi. I had struck three pleasing boundaries, but we lost badly and crashed out of the tournament. Nevertheless, when I returned to Hyderabad, I was VVS Laxman, first-class cricketer.

As one season gave way to another, my routine continued. Total commitment in the lead-up to the action, then travel to Chennai for the Buchi Babu and round off preparations with the Moin-ud-Dowla. I was still available to represent Hyderabad in Under-19 cricket, so the big question ahead of the Hyderabad selection panels was whether to persist with me in the Ranji Trophy, or release me to play for the state Under-19 side one final year.

As it turned out, I got one Ranji game on a rank turner in Kottayam against Kerala, where I eased to 21 with 5 fours when off-spinner B Ramprakash landed the ball on the edge of the pitch and got it to turn a mile and knock my stumps over. I was stupefied at how much the ball had turned, but I chalked it down as another lesson in my cricketing education. After that game, it was back to Under-19 cricket, and a momentous chapter in my career.

I didn’t have a great run in the all-India inter-state Under-19s in Patiala, and we lost to Haryana in the knockouts. I was picked for South Zone on the strength of my reputation, I suspect, and had another average run, yet my name figured in the Rest of India side to play the champions, Punjab. There was a fiveday gap before the start of the match, and while everyone else stayed back in Patiala, I decided that I needed some cheering up. So I opted for the long train journey back home. I spent a day with my parents and uncle, and had a session at the nets in the evening. Talking to my coaches restored my confidence, and the four days spent on the train were well worth it because I ended up making a century against Punjab.

This was in early 1994, just before the Australian Under-19 team was to tour India. For all the runs I had scored, I was yet to make my way into the India Under-19 squad. I had attended the India Under-19 selection trials in Mumbai the previous year, ahead of the tour of South Africa. There were some 60 of us— we were all housed in the dormitory at the Wankhede Stadium—who were pruned to 40 after the first day, and to 30 after the second. Finally, we were divided into two teams to play a ‘selection’ match against each other at the Hindu Gymkhana. It was a small ground and I tried to hit left-arm spinner Rahul Sanghvi out of the ground. Instead, I was caught and bowled for four. My India Under-19 dream lay in tatters.

However, the century against Punjab earned me a place in the Board President’s XI to take on the Australian Under-19s. The Australians were a strong unit, with Mike Hussey, Brett Lee, Jason Gillespie, Matthew Nicholson and Andrew Symonds, among others. I made only 30-something, but Sandeep Patil, the India Under-19 coach, clearly liked what he saw, because he insisted that I be picked for the ‘Test’ series.

Symonds, Corey Richards and Nicholson, in particular, had hammered our spinners to all parts of the Gymkhana Grounds during that Board XI game. S Sriram, the Tamil Nadu all-rounder, was our captain and ace left-arm spinner. He held himself back till the 60th over because he didn’t want the Aussies to have a look at him before the ‘Tests’, but in his very first over, Symonds carted him for three giant sixes. We had never seen such power-hitting at our level, and were shell-shocked.

We had five days of practice at Chepauk before the first ‘Test’, and every evening, we congregated in coach Patil’s room. All of us were in awe of Sandy bhai, as we called him—dashing batsman, World Cup winner, a larger-than-life figure. As he recounted his journey, including that World Cup victory in 1983— which was the clincher for me, to aspire for a career in cricket—we couldn’t have enough of him. He educated us on the preparatory routines of his legendary eammates and himself, of their plans and discussions before and during matches. He told us how much wearing the India cap meant to him, and what it was like to be part of a dressing room full of superstars.

More importantly, he instilled in us the belief that we could not only compete with this Australian side, but also beat them because we were good enough to do so. He told us that the intensity of a practice game was entirely different from a ‘Test’ series, and convinced us not to read too much into what had happened in Hyderabad. By the time of the first ‘Test’, we had embraced his philosophy and went into the game without fear or nerves.

A hard, green surface greeted us in Chennai, and the Australian quicks were immediately in business on day one. As wickets tumbled around me, I held firm and remained unbeaten on 88 while batting at No. 6 in the first innings. We emerged with our heads held high from the drawn game. The next ‘Test’ was on a turner at the Agricultural College ground in Thiruvananthapuram, and I was among the run-getters again—151 not out in the first innings, 77 in the second, the scores made even more special because we won by 226 runs to take a 1–0 lead.

The third ‘Test’ was at the Wankhede Stadium, and Sandy bhai promoted me to No. 5. He had also requested Gavaskar sir to come to the ground to watch me bat. My father, then in Mumbai for a medical conference, was seated in the same stand as the two senior cricketers and overheard their discussions about me. Fortunately, I gave them all something to smile about with 36 in the first innings and 84 in the second, to finish as the highest run-getter for India. My father’s fortuitous visit to the Wankhede apart, my parents were largely disconnected from my cricket. I called them every day from wherever I was, not to talk about cricket but to seek their blessings. Before we hung up, they would ask me to repeat one mantra: ‘I am first’. The first referred not so much to where one finished, but the preparations to get there. They were keen that I should be No. 1 when it came to effort.

It was Baba uncle who chased me—he called my hotel room every evening and kept track of my day-to-day activities. His big concern was that I would lose interest in cricket and fail to realise my potential. He had more faith in my ability than anyone else, and I am not sure how he would have taken it if, for some reason, I had not gone on to play for India.

The successful run against Australia Under-19 also opened my eyes to a world of possibilities. When we played for Andhra Bank, we each got a bat and a pair of gloves at the start of the season. During practice ahead of the Chennai ‘Test’, I broke the only bat I had. In desperation, I asked Pankaj Dharmani if I could borrow one of his bats—he had a contract with Beat All Sports (BAS). After a few hits, I felt so comfortable with the feel of the bat that I requested him to let me use it for the rest of the series. All those runs I made against the Aussies flowed off Pankaj’s bat.

At the end of the series, I asked him if he could help me secure a contract. Almost immediately, Somi Kohli of BAS got cracking. When we travelled to England that summer for the Under-19 series, I had four bats, two pairs of pads and four pairs of gloves. For free. I just couldn’t believe it. Two months earlier, I had been scrambling for a bat and moping over a broken willow. Now, I had four bats. Wow!

The England tour that summer was a fantastic experience. It was the first time I was travelling outside India, the first time I was spending time away from my family, in an alien environment. I was nervous and a little apprehensive of what lay ahead, but I was also excited to be able to play in a different country, in conditions I wasn’t familiar with. Here was a chance to build on the gains of the  series against the Australians and an opportunity to prise open the doors to senior selection.

We played two practice matches before the one-day series, both of which we won comfortably. I warmed up nicely with 84 in the first game and 54 in the second, both times unbeaten. That the latter came against an Under-25 side was especially satisfying. But we were brought down to earth in the one-day series when England won both games with ease. I didn’t make many runs—20 in the first, run out for 5 in the second.

It was time for the longer version. We played the first ‘Test’ in Taunton. England Under-19 was a strong side that included Michael Vaughan, Marcus Trescothick, Chris Silverwood, Vikram Solanki and Anthony McGrath, all future internationals. Steven Lugsden was reputed to be the quickest bowler in the England Under-19 team, and among the fastest in the country. The England fast bowlers knocked our top three over in no time and we were 27 for 3 when I was joined by Amit Sharma, our captain. I laid into Lugsden with four fours in one over and stacked up 119, inclusive of 19 fours. It was exhilarating to hear the applause from the smattering of fans during our stand of 205, with Amit also hitting a century. We posted 430 and went on to win the game by nine wickets. As we were preparing to leave Taunton, an elderly gentleman came up to me and said, ‘Young man, I have seen a lot of cricket. You have the potential to make it really big at the international level.’ I thanked him, but I had no clue who he was. Seeing the perplexed look on my face, Sandy bhai quickly came across to do the introductions. It was Dicky Rutnagur, the respected Indian journalist who had by then made England his home. Even though I didn’t make too many runs in the two remaining ‘Tests’, the tour did wonders for my confidence. Rutnagur sir’s words rang in my ears every time I felt a little low. At the end of the tour, Sandy bhai told the media that I was ready to play for India. Only I know what those words meant to me then. Not only did my coach and one of my idols think I was good enough to play for the country, he was also letting the whole world know this. For a while, I was walking on air. Then dawned the realisation that here was one more person I couldn’t let down. My uncle had told me before I left for England that I should try for a professional contract in the Bradford League for the following summer. It was then the most competitive second-tier league after the County Championship. Azzu bhai was playing for Derbyshire at the time, and the idea was to ask him to help me out. To my great disappointment, by the time we reached England, he had already returned to India.

However, when I broached the subject with Sandy bhai, he immediately got in touch with Solly Adams, who had helped several players from India— primarily from Mumbai—play in the Bradford League. Solly bhai used his good offices to earn me a stint with Hanging Heaton for the summer of 1995. And so, the Under-19 tour of England turned out to be a success in more ways than one.

As soon as we landed in Mumbai from England, we left for Malaysia and Hong Kong to play a couple of exhibition games. When we returned, it was time for the Duleep Trophy. Sandy bhai had convinced the national selectors that the standout Under-19 players from the England tour should be picked for the respective zonal sides, which was how J Arunkumar and I got into the South Zone squad. WV Raman was our captain and V Chamundeswarnath, the former Andhra skipper, our coach.

We had a packed batting line-up including Rahul Dravid and Robin Singh, so it was tough for them to fit me in as a specialist batsman. Since I was bowling medium-pace regularly for India Under-19 at the time, Chamundeswarnath insisted that I be picked as a bowler who could bat at No. 7. I didn’t have a great first three games, and was understandably dropped for the last match. Raman came to the room I shared with my Hyderabad teammate NP Singh at the end of the last league tie and said, ‘Better attitude, lads, the next time.’ I was taken aback. I didn’t know what we had done wrong for him to tick us off like that. As it turned out, our next game was the Ranji tie against Tamil Nadu. At the start of the match, I reminded NP of Raman’s censure, and that got the big fella all pumped up. He dismissed Raman—he still cherishes that photograph— and I made 60, my first half-century in first-class cricket. My first hundred came soon after, against Kerala, in a season that produced more than 500 runs from five games. Between our Ranji commitments was a game in Mumbai for India Youth against England A, after which I travelled the entire night by car and arrived in Bijapur early in the morning for the Ranji match against Karnataka starting that day. I was that desperate to keep playing.

Hyderabad’s qualification for the knockouts hinged on us defeating Andhra in the last league match in Vijayawada. We had a strong batting line-up but could only muster 240. My contribution was a patient 96 not out, with just six fours, on a tricky surface. I was coming to terms with the disappointment of not reaching my hundred when Azzu bhai walked up and gave me his India Test T-shirt. ‘Very well played, you will have a bright future,’ he said.

Because it was an India T-shirt, I knew that I could never wear it, not even in the privacy of my home. When I returned to Hyderabad, I showed it to my uncle and wondered why Azzu bhai had given it to me if I couldn’t wear it. ‘It’s his way of motivating and encouraging you because he believes you have what it takes to play for the country,’ my uncle said.

Azzu bhai was a massive influence for not just me, but Hyderabad cricket as a whole. We were captivated by his wondrous strokeplay, but more than that, we were exposed to his work ethic, his emphasis on fitness, the attention he paid to fielding and catching. Azzu bhai is still the only batsman to have made hundreds in his first three Tests, but he took greater pride in his fielding. We often saw him stay back after a practice session and take close to 100 catches. He was careful about what he ate, his attention to detail was enviable, his mere presence inspiring.

I was totally in awe of him then, and I still am, all these years later. In the second innings against Andhra, we shared a stand of 85. I distinctly remember taking a ball from outside off and wristing it to the right of mid-on. Azzu bhai’s eyes widened, and he nodded in appreciation. For my childhood hero to acknowledge my skills was like a massive seal of approval. Azzu bhai also recognised that my blade was a little shorter than it should be, so he called up Somi Kohli and asked him to send me bats with a blade that was half-inch longer. While I delighted in the attention from my hero, our season ended in December as we lost to Andhra and failed to qualify for the knockouts. We left Vijayawada knowing that we had very little to look forward to.

It was a bitter blow because there were no more matches, but I decided to use that time to work on various aspects of my cricket. January through March was nonstop practice, and then it was time to go to England again, to Hanging Heaton and the Bradford League.

When I landed in England in 1995, I was a novice when it came to even the most basic things. At home, all my needs were taken care of, as I lived with my parents. In England, I was all alone and had to fend for myself. I was given a huge three-bedroom house, but that was about it. I had to learn to do things on my own—cleaning the house, doing my laundry. The expectations from the club were straightforward. ‘You are here as a professional player, we expect you to score runs. That’s your job, that’s what you are paid for.’ There was no sympathy if you failed, no pats on the back, no ‘better luck next time’. If you did not score runs this Saturday, no one would talk to you until you scored runs the next Saturday in the next game. It was unnerving.

My culinary skills were next to non-existent, so for the first week, I survived on cornflakes, baked beans, yoghurt and chocolate. Being a vegetarian wasn’t easy, so I appealed to Solly bhai’s good heart. After that first week, I went to his place for lunch every afternoon, and that’s how I reconnected with the Mumbai lads, Jatin Paranjape, Paras Mhambrey, Abey Kuruvilla, Sairaj Bahutule and Amol Muzumdar. Amol, a very good friend of mine, also got a contract to play in the second division of the Bradford League, and he moved in with me, which erased the feeling of loneliness to a great extent.

Since we only had games over the weekend, we had the week to ourselves. I noticed that all the Mumbai lads were working, so I asked the chairman of my club if I too could get a job. He spoke to the owner of a petrol station, Manish Patel, and I got a job working four nights a week, between 9 p.m. and 7 a.m. The journey each way—the house was in Dewsbury, the gas station in Rawdon— involved two bus rides and two long walks, but I was up for it. I was to handle the till, sitting behind a bulletproof window. It sounded easy enough, until I encountered people who drove off without paying, or when drunk youngsters sauntered in, in the early hours, and created a ruckus.

For a wide-eyed youngster from Hyderabad, all this was completely new and mildly shocking, but I willed myself to stay on and savour the experience. My uncle wrote me a letter castigating me for working. ‘You haven’t gone there to earn extra pounds but to work on your game,’ was his rebuke. But I wanted to erase the image of the laidback Hyderabadi. I wanted to quietly tell those who cared to listen that Hyderabadis weren’t lazy and indifferent. It wasn’t about the money. By the end, I had been exposed to situations I might never have encountered otherwise and that made me a better human being.

On quiet nights at the station, I watched Hindi movies or read motivational books. At the crack of dawn, the suppliers arrived with refills—milk, foodstuff, cigarettes. Once that was out of the way, I had to mop the floor before Manish Patel arrived, at 7 a.m. It was a timely initiation into self-reliance and discipline. It toughened me up and opened my eyes to a life I would not have known existed had I stayed back in Hyderabad. In so many ways, it helped me understand what VVS Laxman was all about.

Cricket-wise, I had a tough season. At Hanging Heaton, the surface was very slow and not to my liking. It hampered my stroke-making, and it was no surprise that I scored runs in away games but not at home. When I didn’t get runs, the attitude of the club was deeply disconcerting. But upset as I was at being given the silent treatment, it also helped me realise the importance of a professional approach. Towards the end of my stint, I started to feel homesick, but I was determined to fulfil my contract. When I returned to India after those five months, I was a changed person. I was a lot more independent and selfconfident. I had looked after myself, I had handled criticism and praise reasonably well, and I had saved some money too!

The Indian season used to be unique in that we had two tournaments in the south, which featured strong teams from across the country, and players could use these to get themselves into match mode. I used the Buchi Babu and the Moin-ud-Dowla tournaments to refamiliarise myself with conditions after eight months of no match-play in India, and earned a call-up to the Board President’s XI that was to play Lee Germon’s New Zealand in Rajkot in October 1995. I watched the game from the sidelines, but to share a dressing room again with Azzu bhai, the Board XI captain, and other internationals furthered my education.

It was Duleep Trophy season again, this time under Raman’s captaincy. That Manohar sir, who had watched me climb the rungs from close quarters, was the coach of South Zone was both confidence-building and reassuring. He knew what buttons to push, and did so without hesitation. Unfortunately, I was run out for 47 in the first innings of the second game against West Zone in Alwar, and he was upset that I had thrown it away. At the end of the day’s play, he made me wear my pads and run 15 laps of the ground. It was both embarrassing and humiliating. Manohar sir must have sensed my despondency, because once I completed my ‘punishment’, he told me, ‘This will be a constant reminder to you that once you get a start, you must go on and get a good score.’ Those words stayed with me during the second innings. By then, the surface had deteriorated rapidly. I had never seen so much rough on a pitch. The abrasive nature of the track also facilitated reverse swing, and Salil Ankola was getting the ball to reverse at a considerable pace. It was the first time I was facing reverse, and I couldn’t for the life of me understand how the ball could swing in the direction of the shine, against all logic. Rahul Dravid sensed my discomfiture and talked me through it. When he was at the non-striker’s end, he held his bat in his left hand if the shiny side was on the outside, and in his right hand if it was on the inside. The tip-off was to prove invaluable. Rahul made a hundred and I scored 121. Manohar sir was happy, but I was even more delighted at having come through perhaps the most probing test of my skill and character until then.

I made another hundred, in Lucknow against East Zone, as did Rahul. It was another difficult pitch to bat on, but I was timing the ball beautifully. Suddenly, I had two hundreds in four matches, and was picked to play in a quadrangular ‘A’ series in Sharjah with Madan Lal as our coach. I sat out the first two games but responded with a century at No. 3 against the UAE. The coach was impressed, as were the national selectors, but when I rejoined the Hyderabad team, the runs suddenly dried up.

It wasn’t until the last league game that I rediscovered my touch, making 70 against Karnataka, but throwing my hand away when batting with the tail. Shivlal Yadav was immediately in my ear, cautioning against doing so in the future. I took that to heart, learning to enjoy batting alongside the tail and egging them on to hold their own.

The runs came in a torrent after that as we played in the Ranji knockouts. I made 132 against Assam in the pre-quarters, and 196 against Vidarbha in the last-eight game. The semi-final was against old foes Karnataka, and in the second innings, I was on 199 with the last ball of the match to go. Rahul, my good friend who was leading Karnataka, advised Dodda Ganesh to bowl the ball wide of the off stump. I somehow made excellent contact and picked up the boundary that took me to my maiden first-class double-ton, an unbeaten 203. On the train back to Hyderabad, for the first time in my life, I began to feel that the India cap was within reach. The Indian team was to tour England in the summer of 1996, and I felt I had done everything I could to put my hand up for selection. But not all dreams are immediately realised. I was devastated when I was not picked for the squad and instead named first standby. I felt my scores had done the talking for me, but I was not giving up. I still believed it was just a matter of time.

I did go to England that summer, if not in the way I had hoped. I had signed up with Pudsey Congs as a professional for the season. I had played against the Congs for Hanging Heaton the previous year, and managed to attract the eye of Phil Carrick, their skipper. Phil had played for the Yorkshire first team for 23 years and captained them for several seasons. He was a respected player and well known in Yorkshire circles. Even when I was having a poor run at home for Hanging Heaton, Phil told me that he saw a lot of potential in me. He realised that the pitch there, slow as it was, didn’t suit my batting, so he asked if I would like to play for the Congs instead.

I took up the offer and went to play league cricket in England for a second season, in 1996. I didn’t want an unmanageable three-bedroom apartment this time, so we started to look for a one-bedroom apartment. During that one-week house-hunt, I stayed with Phil and his family in their seven-acre farmhouse. His wife, Ellie, and daughters, Emma and Philippa, immediately made me feel welcome and treated me like a member of their family. I was touched that for that entire week they ate only vegetarian food for my sake. It was the first time I was enjoying the hospitality of an Englishman and his family. Their warmth filled me with joy, and I suppose that reflected in my cricket. 

I smashed records, scored runs aplenty and won awards galore. At Phil’s behest, I dumped medium-pace and started bowling off-spin. That helped me win the best all-rounder award, to go with the best batsman and best fielder prizes. My uncle had made me promise that there would be no adventurism such as working part-time, so I devoted the entire summer to working on my cricket. Between matches, I turned up to watch the Indian team in action. In those days, you could drop in to the Indian dressing room, and I watched matches from there in Nottingham and at Headingley. Seeing Rahul and Sourav made me even more determined to earn my spurs. My peers were playing for the country and I didn’t want to be left out.

The five months with the Congs took my game to another level. Phil allowed me to practise at the Yorkshire academy, and Matthew Hoggard bowled to me whenever he was not part of the Yorkshire second XI. Apart from Matthew, the Congs also had Richard Kettleborough, the ICC Elite Panel umpire who was a handy all-rounder. That was the benefit season for another celebrated Yorkshireman, Peter Hartley, so we went around the county playing a lot of exhibition games.

It was a breakthrough season for me in every way imaginable. Alongside practising with the Yorkshire county team, I also trained with them and received structured routines from their trainer. Throughout those five months, all I did was live cricket. For that, I can never be grateful enough to Phil and to his lovely family. Phil predicted then that in the near future, Hoggard and I would play international cricket against each other. Prophetic words.

When I left for home, Phil sent a letter through me to my uncle. In it, he talked about Laxman the person, and how committed to the game I was. He wrote about my technique, and the specific areas we had worked on during those five months. He had spoken to me about the challenges and pressures of a professional player. He had shared his experiences of bowling for hours to Geoffrey Boycott, and what made Boycott the batsman he was. He opened my eyes to how a professional player should prepare for and approach a game, and how he should take responsibility for the team.

When I played for Hanging Heaton in 1995, it was alongside amateurs for whom cricket was more of a hobby than a passion. This time, I was mentored by someone who had not only theoretical knowledge but also the experience of playing professional cricket. In his letter, Phil also lauded my comfort against fast bowlers. Because of my technique against fast bowling and because I had more time to play my strokes, he felt I would definitely succeed in international cricket. I had batted at No. 4 for Hanging Heaton, but Phil had pushed me up to open the batting and I’d had a lot of success. He also acknowledged my contribution towards the growth of the youngsters in the side, as well as the second-team players. When my uncle showed me the letter, I felt proud and humbled.

I returned to India in the autumn of 1996 a more evolved cricketer. There was a temporary setback when I fell for nought to Dodda Ganesh in the Irani Cup game in Bangalore, but I made up with a fine 70 in the second. It was after this game that the Indian team to play Australia in the one-off Test in New Delhi was to be announced. I didn’t know the exact date, but I knew the selection committee meeting was imminent. Whenever I was at home, I hung around the phone, waiting for the call that never came.

Then, one afternoon, as I made my way back home from St John’s, I saw many of my journalist friends gathered outside my apartment. From the big grins on their faces, I knew. Without a word being said, I guessed that I had been included in the Test side. There were backslaps and handshakes and big hugs. Everything happened in slow motion. For a while, I went numb. Then, I just couldn’t wipe the goofy smile off my face.

We all trooped into the house, and I broke the news to my mother. She stood on tip-toe to kiss me on my cheek, a gesture that broke the dam. My head began to spin, and there was a surreal feeling, but the celebrations were low-key, as was typical, until my uncle arrived in a maelstrom of emotions and swept me off my feet. My mother made sweets for all of us, I gave a number of interviews and was happily exhausted by the time my father returned from the hospital. ‘Nana, I am in the Indian team,’ I told him. He looked at me for a long moment, then gently pulled me towards him by the back of my neck and held me tightly.

First mission accomplished.
