2 April 2011. As MS held the World Cup aloft at the Wankhede, I felt pride swell through me. We had ended a 28-year wait and were champions again. It was fitting that the captain delivered the winning blow, a towering six over longon that sealed the final against Sri Lanka. I was long done with ODI cricket, but I had lived the World Cup experience during my spell at the NCA, and felt I had made the journey with my friends.

It was the best going-away gift for Gary, who had announced—despite our exhortations—that the World Cup would be his last assignment with the Indian team. India now held the Test No. 1 ranking and the World Cup simultaneously, just returns for the love our numerous fans had showered on us all these years. The fourth season of the IPL, which started a week after the World Cup final, was my final tilt at the 20-over game, with a new franchise—Kochi Tuskers Kerala—but I was already bracing for the tour of the Caribbean, in mid- June. Sachin had opted out to spend time with his family, while Gautam, Viru and Yuvi were missing because of injury. That left Rahul and me as the only specialist batsmen with experience, alongside MS.

We had a new coach in Duncan Fletcher, the former Zimbabwe captain. Duncan’s reputation preceded him. He had been the England coach for eight years, between 1999 and 2007, and was in charge when England defeated Australia at home in the 2005 Ashes. Gary had recommended Duncan to the  BCCI, and I looked forward to a new chapter in Indian cricket. While we would miss Gary, we all knew what was required of us, and I was confident of a seamless transition from the Gary Kirsten era to one under Duncan Fletcher. It was essential for Rahul and me to lead the way, and while I didn’t have a great first Test on a slow track at Sabina Park in Kingston, Rahul held our challenge together. He put on an exhibition in the second innings with a characteristically industrious 112, easily the difference between the sides. The bowlers defended a target of 326 with ease as we cruised to a 63-run win. As we moved to Barbados, I felt I owed the team runs, and plenty of them. As though  in response to that thought, we were presented with a surface that made severe demands on our courage and conviction.

Fidel Edwards was getting the ball to fly off a length, bowling really quickly with a slingy action that made life very difficult. We were 38 for 4 in no time until Suresh helped me add 117 for the fifth wicket. Once I got through Edwards’ hostility, I began to enjoy myself. My 85 out of a team total of 201 was studded with boundaries and I followed it up with 87 in the second innings, an equally dominant hand. I was delighted at how well I was striking the ball, but I was also disappointed that I had thrown away two 100s in four days. The weather prevented us from translating our command over the game into a victory, while more rain, a slow surface, and a ball that became very soft very quickly stymied our victory charge in the final Test in Roseau.

My tryst with annoyingly unusual dismissals continued in Roseau when I was stumped off Shivnarine Chanderpaul, who pitched his leg-spinners so wide of the off stump that I couldn’t have reached them with a barge pole. I let one such ball spin by without even looking at it, then took a couple of steps down the track to do some ‘gardening’. Carlton Baugh whipped off the bails and claimed the stumping, and the umpire ruled me out. I contended that the ball was dead, but the umpire ruled it to be still in play. I had made a third consecutive half-ton, but the hundred remained a step too far. We ought to have swept the series 3–0 but the weather in Bridgetown and Roseau played spoilsport. 1–0 wasn’t shabby though, all told, and we approached the next stop with our confidence high. We had won our previous series in England, and we saw no reason why we couldn’t back that up.

The euphoria of the World Cup triumph, and our convincing performances in the Caribbean despite missing several key batsmen, contributed to that belief. We had talent, experience and form in our corner and were in a good mental space as, after a warm-up game in Taunton, we headed to Lord’s for the first Test. We had had many noteworthy successes at the Mecca of cricket. A warm glow enveloped me in the days leading up to the first Test. Excitement and anticipation jostled with each other as the big day dawned.

Zak had missed the West Indies tour, but showed no signs of rust after MS put England in. In excellent rhythm, he got rid of Alastair Cook inside the first hour, and dismissed Andrew Strauss soon after lunch. Then came the first in a series of terrible mishaps that contributed to our disastrous campaign. Halfway through his fourteenth over, Zak pulled up short, clutching his hamstring. I felt a shiver run through me. I realised that my buddy was in trouble, but I didn’t imagine then that his tour would be over. I prayed it was a niggle and no more, but as it turned out, the injury was a lot more serious. MS’s decision to ask England to bat was based around Zak leading our pace attack. But a little over two hours into the match, we were a specialist bowler short, and not just any bowler—the star of our triumph in England four years earlier, the man who was both the strike bowler and an excellent guide to the younger quicks in our ranks.

Losing our premier bowler less than halfway through the first day was a massive blow. It meant that we had only three full-fledged bowlers—even MS was forced to shed his wicketkeeping pads as he sent down eight overs of brisk medium pace—and England gratefully seized the opening. Kevin Pietersen lashed a blazing double hundred and hauled England well past 450. Praveen Kumar and Ishant stuck to their guns, but even though the former got five on his Lord’s debut, neither of them was as penetrative as Zak would have been. There was little help for Bhajji, all of which played into England’s hands. Our spirit had been bent by Zak’s injury, and when we conceded a 188-run deficit, it was truly broken. Only Rahul stood tall with a polished 103. It was the precursor to what was to follow. All series long, Rahul batted superbly, waging a lone battle whether as opener or at his preferred No. 3 position. All series long, the rest of the batting unit let him down.

Rahul made three 100s in that four-Test series, each of them a gem of the highest quality. He enjoyed batting in England, and that counted for a lot. His feet moved beautifully and decisively, his shot selection was perfect, and patience was in any case second nature to him. He was forced to open in five of the eight innings, and responded brilliantly, despite the long hours spent in the field. I marvelled at his physical endurance and mental strength. He was like Casabianca, standing bravely on the burning deck while the rest around him floundered. I felt ashamed that I wasn’t doing more to help him.

My numbers in England aren’t the most flattering. In 11 Tests and 19 innings, I scored 586 runs at an average of 34.47—11.50 runs per innings below my career average—and had a highest of 74. Statistics seldom lie, but I never felt out of place in England during my three Test tours. There was no discernible pattern to my dismissals apart from a bias to the pull that could even hint at a technical weakness. I have eight scores between 40 and 74, and four more between 22 and 39; I have been dismissed in single digits a mere four times, one of those when we were pressing for quick runs and a declaration at Headingley in 2002.

The key to batting in England is to let the ball come to you, to not reach for it or get into your stroke early. Also, because the conditions can fluctuate so much during the course of the day, you never feel ‘in’. When you get to 30 anywhere else in the world, you are well settled, you know what to expect, and you can then start to dominate, if your game is like mine. But in England, things can change in an instant when the clouds gather. You have to guard against mental errors and, unfortunately, I didn’t do that consistently enough. The toughest batting phase in England—and everywhere else, for that matter—is the first few deliveries, and I negotiated that early period successfully 15 times out of 19. If anything, I was pulled down by my inability to build on those starts. The way I look at it, I got myself out a majority of the times rather than being dismissed by the bowler, and that’s not something I am proud of. Because of the slow pitches, you have to play late, wait for the ball to come to you. But I would often get into positions early, and that got me into trouble. I have been out caught on the pull nearly half a dozen times in England because I was in position early. Had the ball come on quicker, I would have been able to roll my wrists and keep it down. Because the bounce was spongy and it didn’t rush on, I ended up playing it in the air numerous times. Like I said, silly mental errors that cost me dear. I should have chosen my strokes with greater circumspection—I had the perfect template in front of me in the form of Rahul —but I didn’t.

In 2011, I was out to the pull twice, and twice I was a victim of James Anderson’s brilliance as he made a mess of my stumps. Anderson was one of the most devastating bowlers in English conditions. He had this habit of going wide of the crease, and the angle from which he delivered the ball as well as his wrist position indicated that the ball would keep coming in to me. However, as if driven by some invisible force, it straightened on pitching, which meant I ended up playing inside the line. It was quality bowling.

We tried to regroup from the hammering at Lord’s, and quickly made our intentions clear by lopping off the English top after MS chose to field first for a second straight game, in Nottingham. Sreesanth had come in for Zak, and he, Praveen and Ishant took three wickets apiece. Even though England recovered from 117 for 7 to 221, we had reason to be optimistic.

Viru was supposed to join the squad only from the third Test on, which meant that for the first two Tests, we had just two specialist openers—Gautam and Abhinav Mukund, on his first tour of England. Gauti had to sit out the second Test because of an injury, which forced Rahul to start the game as an opener. I didn’t think it was fair to our former captain but as ever, Rahul didn’t complain. Abhinav fell to the first ball of our first innings late on the first evening, and I joined Rahul with an hour left. It was easily the most challenging one hour I have batted in Test cricket. It was a cold evening, overcast and gloomy, and Anderson and Stuart Broad were on top of their game. Every ball was a searing examination, and we had to be on full alert to ward off danger. By the time we returned, unconquered, after 15 testing overs, I was on my last reserves of mental strength. Stumps couldn’t have been more opportune. The next morning, I played my strokes freely to get to 54. I consider this one of my best Test innings for the manner in which I compiled the runs—I gave the previous evening to the on-song bowlers, and got on top the following day when conditions eased marginally. I feathered a faint edge to the keeper off Tim Bresnan while defending off the back foot. Rahul showed how to make a good thing count with a second hundred of the series. Yuvi chipped in with 62 as we led by 67.

Our tryst with misery, however, was far from over. Any thoughts we may have had of forcing England into defensive mode disappeared when Bhajji left the field early in their second essay with a pulled abdominal muscle. We had lost a second experienced bowler in the middle of a Test, and with only three regular bowlers, we looked flat and dispirited. England made merry with Ian Bell in the forefront, and confronted us with a target of nearly 500, and we capitulated to 158 all out and a massive defeat, by 319 runs. Our confidence was shot, we were in shock. We had come to England aspiring to win the series, and we had been properly schooled. Predictably, we went further downhill from there, losing the remaining two Tests by an innings each. It was embarrassing, humiliating, devastating. True, the bowling had been handicapped by the injuries to Zak and Bhajji, but the batting group had no excuse. With the honourable exception of the admirable Rahul, we had all come a cropper. It was not a pleasant realisation. It was the first test of Duncan’s man-management skills. He was as new to us as we were to him; several of the players had been absent from the Caribbean series, hampering the getting-to-know-each-other process. To his credit, he ran a tight ship but kept the environment light and healthy. There were no recriminations, no finger-pointing. We knew that collectively, we had allowed ourselves to be outplayed. Fessing up didn’t alter the result, but at least we were not looking for outs.

Predictably, tongues started wagging in India, not without justification. There was anger and outrage among the fans because of the way we had surrendered—not just the Test series, but also the No. 1 ranking that had been ours for 20 months. When West Indies came over in November, we found ourselves, not for the first time, in a no-win situation. We were playing at home, and were expected to win. Anything else would be catastrophic.

I was carrying a lot of baggage from both the personal and the collective failure in England, and was low on confidence going into the first Test at the Kotla. That must have reflected in my body language, because after I was dismissed for one in the first innings, Krishnamachari Srikkanth called me over to his room. Cheeka sir was the chairman of selectors and we shared a great bond emanating from our shared spiritual outlook. His message was simple. ‘Put the past behind you. All it can do is weigh you down. You are a better person and a better batsman than that, go on and don’t hold back.’

Once again, a reminder of the basics worked wonders. We faced a tricky chase of 276, and made serene progress. I played without inhibition for the first time in three Tests, and remained unbeaten on 58 as we raced home by five wickets. Cheeka sir had pushed the right buttons, the runs had returned and my mind was at peace.

Happily, the second Test was at Eden and I enjoyed myself while putting on a second double-hundred stand at the venue with MS. I made 176, a fluent compilation, and the bowlers took over to complete an innings win and give us a winning 2–0 lead. The meltdown in England was not forgotten, but we had shown resilience against a reasonably well-stocked opponent, even if it was in our comfort zone.

The series was to wind down at the Wankhede, and ahead of that match, Duncan spoke to Rahul and me. He wanted to blood new talent in the dead rubber with an eye on the future. I told him that I didn’t want to miss a Test match. I didn’t know how much cricket I had left in me, and I was just coming off a big hundred. If I was fit and available, there was no way I was sitting out a Test match—the only format Rahul and I were playing for the country. Duncan relented, and I was privileged to be part of one of the most thrilling draws in Test history. West Indies dominated the first innings but we recovered strongly, and when the final ball was bowled, the scores were level. We had been set 243 for victory, and we finished on 242 for nine in a game where R Ashwin showcased his all-round credentials. He made his maiden century in our first innings, and returned 9 for 190 with his off-spin. To see him stack up the numbers he has with the ball since then has been anything but a surprise.

Like we had the previous year to South Africa, the Test specialists travelled to Australia in December, a good 10 days ahead of the rest of the squad, of whom several were engaged in the limited-overs matches against the West Indians. For many of us—Sachin, Rahul, Viru, Zak and me—it would be our last tour Down Under. I couldn’t see any one of us being around in three years’ time, not even the ageless, tireless, peerless Sachin. It was now or never, our final tilt at history in a land where, for all our heroics, a Test series victory had remained out of reach.

As a team, we eyed redemption in our first away outing since the England whitewash. I was keyed up, wanting to contribute to the team and create history. Given that I had also made up my mind to retire at the end of what I was confident would be a successful campaign, I had already set myself up for failure by putting undue pressure on myself.

Sailaja had travelled with me to Australia, and before the start of the first Test in Melbourne, she told me that I looked tense and nervous, which was very out of character for me. She knew that I was working myself up into a state, and told me to go and enjoy myself, like I invariably did in Australia. I knew she was right, and I tried to shake off the nerves, but they had taken a vice-like grip over me. I didn’t start the series well, and as one failure led to another, I continued to sell myself short. Once the self-imposed pressure mounted, the runs dried up. I had a poor series, the team had a bad run and we were put in our place by a strong, but by no means invincible, Australian side.

As the series spiralled from bad to worse, my mood mirrored the darkness in our camp. Sailaja had returned home and I had gone into my shell, tremendously upset with myself for not having done anything worthwhile to arrest our slide. By the time of the final Test in Adelaide, my confidence was sub-zero. It was easily one of the lowest points of my career. Long before Adelaide, the reality had sunk in that there would be no series win in Australia on my CV. After the Adelaide defeat, Sailaja called me from India, but such was my state of mind that I repeatedly ignored those calls. I was wallowing in selfpity, and as her calls went unanswered, she started to panic. She called up Vijeta, who in turn spoke to Rahul. At one in the morning, Rahul knocked on my door along with Sachin and Zak. They had witnessed first-hand how much I had been impacted by the events of the past month and a half, and they spent two hours trying to console and reinvigorate me. I was in a slightly better place when my friends departed for their rooms, and reconciled to the truth of another series defeat in Australia, which hurt even more than my personal failures. I had briefly flirted with retirement after the second Test in Perth, by which time we were 0–2 down in the four-match showdown. There was not even a mathematical chance of winning the series, and as that thought continued to germinate, I was tempted to call it a day. But I also knew that it was emotion more than anything else that was driving me. I chose to take a step back, deciding that that was not the right time to do anything dramatic. However, the contours of an inner conflict were beginning to take shape. The real battle was just about to begin.