We had just returned to our hotel from the SCG on New Year’s Day in 2000. The mood in the camp was abysmal. We hadn’t just been defeated in the first two Tests, we’d been beaten out of sight. Australia were proud, strong, cocky. We had been meek, timid, hesitant. There seemed to be no end in sight to our overseas travails.

Personally, the tour hadn’t gone well at all. I had been so keyed up coming to Australia. I was fascinated by the country, the people, the pitches, and their attacking brand of cricket. Although I was far removed from the average Aussie in terms of temperament, I felt a certain kinship with them. I badly wanted to wow the Australians. Instead, and not for the first time since I started opening the batting in the Caribbean in early 1997, I wondered if my Test career was already over.

Lying on the floor in the room, my eyes shut, I watched the last three years run through my head at whirlwind speed. It was the first time I was experiencing anything of this nature—the same scenario was to play out a little over a year later, on my visit to Shirdi ahead of the Kolkata Test of 2001. I didn’t like much of what I saw. I couldn’t fault myself when it came to commitment and my work ethic, but the returns hadn’t been encouraging. The maiden hundred remained elusive even though I had come close. I had done reasonably well in an unfamiliar position, but something was missing.

As the images played out in my mind, my thoughts wandered. I reflected  on the tour that had gone by, and the tour that I thought was over for me. I had not made runs in Adelaide, where, for the first time since the West Indian tour of 1997, I hadn’t opened the innings. I hadn’t delivered in Melbourne either, despite returning to the top of the order. The runs in the warm-up games, in difficult circumstances and against quality attacks, counted for little. I had failed in four Test innings, I hadn’t been picked for the triangular series with Pakistan and Australia, which was to follow the New Year Test in Sydney. I felt a huge sense of despondency. I had let myself down, and all those who had backed me, but more importantly, I had not lived up to the expectations of my teammates. I had failed my country. This wasn’t why I had started playing cricket in the first place. This wasn’t why I had agreed to open in the West Indies even though I had never played in that position previously.

Ahead of the trip to the Caribbean in early 1997—and we only had four days between the team announcement and our departure—I had made one technical adjustment that I was to later regret. Having set my initial misgivings aside and whole-heartedly accepted the responsibility that came with opening the batting, my coaches in Hyderabad and I felt that I could no longer afford to forward press like I had done all my life. It was a huge blunder, I came to realise that subsequently, because it completely threw me off my rhythm. It wasn’t easy to erase the muscle memory of 15 or so years in two or three practice sessions. The wisdom of hindsight reveals the folly of the change in approach, but at that time, we did what we thought would give me the best chance to succeed in my new role in the batting order.

My coaches and I decided that I should abandon the forward press, and that my initial trigger movement should now be back and across to give me a little more time to allow for pace and swing. They told me that it would be difficult to match up as an opener if I didn’t make the adjustment. They suggested that I play back and across because of the quality of bowling I would encounter, most notably from Curtly Ambrose and Courtney Walsh. Ambrose and Walsh were not just tall pacemen who could extract steep bounce. They also got the ball to move around and gave nothing away. Unless you were on top of your defensive game, there was little chance of success.

Once it was decided that I was going to open, we sat down and watched the footage available of the West Indian bowlers. It confirmed our assessment— steep bounce from a good length area would be the greatest challenge. Right from my childhood, my initial trigger had been a short step forward with my left leg, with the weight on the ball of my foot. Then, based on the length, my next movement would be either forward or back. We felt that with this footwork and trigger movement, it would be difficult to counter the bounce from a good length. A majority of the international openers who had succeeded against these bowlers employed the back-and-across trigger movement, so we decided to use the same.

When you play back and across, the right leg moves a little back and a little sideways, but the weight continues to remain on the ball of the foot. This movement, we felt, would give me a fraction of a second more to counter the bounce from a length. It made sense at the time, so I changed the style that had served me excellently till then.

It’s funny how the mind works. A month ago, in South Africa, against an equally quick Allan Donald on faster, bouncier tracks, I had used the forward press without hassles. The few days we had at our disposal after the team to the West Indies was announced seemed to have worked against me, because we probably overanalysed things to my detriment.

I have always believed that the starting point, the first movements you make as a batsman, are the ones that dictate the movements to follow. The one flaw that crept in now, without my realising it, was that my head, instead of being still, started to fall to the right. Instead of moving only my feet, I started to move my head too, and that disturbed my balance. When the head—the heaviest  part of the body—is not still, it biomechanically affects all the succeeding movements. By going against my grain, I was already selling myself short. The other change I made, on my own, was my mental approach. I was a free-flowing batsman, a natural strokemaker, playing well-executed, attacking shots. But I assumed that as an opening batsman, my role was more about taking the shine off the new ball, blunting the pace bowlers, playing only when I had to, leaving as many balls as possible, and not worrying too much about the scoreboard for the first hour or thereabouts. Then, I could play my shots, particularly in overseas conditions. I was so preoccupied with not getting out that the flow imperceptibly vanished from my batting. I realised far too late that even though I was getting my eye in, I wasn’t finding the rhythm to play my shots. The combination of balance, coordination and mindset that had brought me success in first-class cricket had gone haywire. From an attacking batsman looking for runs at every possible opportunity, I became obsessed with playing correctly, like an opening batsman is expected to, more intent on occupying the crease than anything else.

The early success I courted with this altered technique and mindset convinced me that the changes were justified. When roomie Navjot Sidhu and I opened in the practice game against Jamaica at Sabina Park in Kingston against a formidable attack that included Walsh and Franklyn Rose, I more than held my own. I batted for more than six hours, played out 271 deliveries, and was on course for a century in my first appearance as an opener when I was run out for 98. I had gone to the Caribbean expecting the ball to rush on to the bat, but even at Sabina Park, all we got was a very slow surface. I didn’t enjoy playing so many balls for so few runs.

After that game, which ended in a draw, and ahead of the first Test, both teams were invited for dinner by the Indian High Commissioner in Kingston. Rohan Kanhai, then the manager of the West Indian team, sought me out that evening to say, ‘Young man, I saw your knock. You have lots of potential, keep up the good work.’ Mr Kanhai was a legend, and I had heard so much about him from Jaisimha sir. I was also aware that he had taken Gavaskar sir under his wing during the latter’s debut series in 1971, offering sage advice to the young opener in the opposition. To hear him say nice things about my batting made me proud. When I committed to opening the batting, I had taken up a challenge that I believed I was well equipped to meet. I had always enjoyed playing against fast bowlers, as compared to spinners, especially at the start of my innings, and I thought it was better to bat at a position from where I could set the game up for the team. But it wasn’t easy coming to terms with the fact that I would be batting one position higher—I had got used to batting at No. 3 for Hyderabad and it was the position I was most comfortable at.

Superficially, it is almost the same position, and even when you are slotted in at No. 3, you are mentally prepared to face the second ball of the innings. In reality, things aren’t as simple.

Rahul Dravid had to open the batting for India in Tests several times, and while he did so uncomplainingly and with no little success, he was never comfortable in that role. I held a similar point of view. In first-class cricket, I can barely recall an instance when, from No. 3, I went in to face the second ball of the innings. Yes, I have gone out in the third or the fourth over, by which time there is some kind of shape to the innings, but very, very rarely to the second ball. When you are batting at No. 3, the approach is the same as that of an opener —give the first hour to the bowler—but you don’t face the new cherry straightaway.

In teams for whom I had batted at No. 3 in domestic cricket, the opening batsmen had been very good, while the quality of the opposition fast bowlers hadn’t been consistently threatening. Seldom did I have to come out in the first or second over and face a hostile spell. In international cricket, it was the exact opposite. All the teams had excellent new-ball attacks, and an early wicket was always on the cards. And here I was, facing up to the two best fast bowlers in the world in their own backyard, both of them fresh and mean and with a brand new ball to attack with.

There was little indication of the pitfalls that lay in store for me when, following my 98 in the warm-up fixture, I made 64 in my first Test innings as an opener. This was also at Sabina Park, and while I was delighted with the runs under my belt, I was far from my fluent self. Rose dismissed me for the second time in the drawn Test for 27, but any confidence I might have derived from Kingston disappeared instantly when I was dismissed for a second-ball blob by Ambrose in the second Test in Port of Spain.

We suffered a debilitating defeat in the third Test in Bridgetown after being set only 120 for victory. Batting in the fourth innings was tricky, but there was no justification for us being bowled out for 81, inside 36 overs. I top-scored with 19, but what did that even mean? What did it count for? After a promising start in Kingston, my next three scores as an opener were 0, 6 and 19. That was the first time I heard muffled talk of me being a non-regular opener. I was to be dropped for the fourth Test in St John’s until Sidhu contracted malaria, and I responded with 56 in a game badly affected by rain. Ajay Jadeja, my opening partner for that game, amassed 96, so I was predictably dropped for the fifth and last Test in Georgetown with Sidhu having recovered from his illness.

Those three hours of ineptitude with the bat in Bridgetown cost us the series, and it was hard to look for positives. Personally, I could take consolation from having made two half-centuries in six innings as an opening batsman, but that would have been clutching at straws. The atmosphere within the team deteriorated rapidly after the Bridgetown disaster. There was a bust-up between Sidhu and Madan Lal that affected me deeply—it was the second time I was seeing the coach take on a senior player after his showdown with Azzu bhai in Kolkata.

Madan Lal was giving us catches at Arnos Vale before the start of the oneday international when our physio Ali Irani went up and whispered in his ear. Immediately, the coach’s face changed colour. He threw down his gloves and bat, and went into the dressing room. While our drills continued, we could sense that all was not well. When I entered the dressing room, the atmosphere was tense. I was told by my colleagues that Sidhu had expressed his inability to play after sustaining a leg injury at the nets. He had a shiner on his thigh, big and black and blue, and was clearly in distress, but apparently the coach had insisted that the injury wasn’t as serious as the senior batsman was making it out to be. On top of that, we went on to lose the game from a decent position, which made things decidedly worse.

As a player, I didn’t feel secure because I didn’t know what was required of me. I didn’t feel at any stage that I was valued. There was lack of communication about where I stood despite getting two half-centuries in the Test matches. It’s when things aren’t going well that the role of the coach becomes important. At that level, his responsibility isn’t restricted to making minor technical adjustments. It is more about man-management and motivation, and keeping channels of communication open. Instead, we found ourselves at the opposite end of the spectrum. There was no communication whatsoever from the coach; the seniors were caught up in their own selves as they were not delivering the goods, and Sachin put too much pressure on himself. To see him break down after the Bridgetown defeat was heart-rending. He felt as if the whole world was ranged against him. A strong, empathetic coach would have helped. Unfortunately, there was little support for him.

I have the greatest respect for Madan Lal as a person, but as a coach, there was so much he could have done differently. He wasn’t a good communicator, and he should have invested more in creating a positive environment. The cracks in the team, which had been papered over in the early stages of the tour, opened up dramatically after the Barbados hammering. Everything was linked to the outcome. The defeat changed the mindset of the team, and the two-man coaching staff of Madan Lal and Ali Irani didn’t seem equipped to meet the challenge of restoring the equilibrium of the already shattered players.

Throughout the tour, there was no concerted effort to get the best out of the players. In fact, it was a tour bereft of leadership. There was no one to even talk about how to bounce back as a team. It was tough for me because I was so intent upon, and desirous of, fulfilling my goal. Every time I didn’t score runs, I put more pressure on myself. I didn’t realise it then, but I was not enjoying the game, I was not playing the game my way. The fun element had gone out of my cricket very early in what could have been a breakthrough tour for me. To compound matters, I didn’t get to play a single one-dayer either.

So I hadn’t set the world afire in my first Test series as an opener, but I thought I had done reasonably well under the circumstances. My last Test innings was a half-century, and I fully expected to be on the tour to Sri Lanka later that year. However, when the team was announced, I wasn’t in the squad. There was no communication from either the team management or the selection panel, which left me even more confused. Where I was lacking? What were the areas I needed to improve in?

The axing reinforced my thinking that unless you created an impact straightaway—read scored a hundred—you were easy meat. It was also the beginning of the first phase of uncertainty in my Test career. I was sometimes picked, mostly not. Each time I came back, I did so convinced that it was my last opportunity. That was an obvious recipe for disaster, because I was getting bogged down by the weight of my own expectations. I lost focus in the process. I was only interested in the outcome.

I didn’t have a great start to the 1997–98 domestic season. My crisis of confidence was acute. I played for the Board President’s XI against the Sri Lankans in Cuttack in November 1997 and scored a hundred at No. 3, but the runs didn’t come for Hyderabad, where too I had gone back to No. 3. Jaisimha sir had taken over as our coach, and he told me that while I might be an opener for India, for him, I would always be a No. 3 batsman.

I found my touch as the domestic season unfolded, and made a double hundred in the knockouts against Baroda at the IPCL ground, an effort that earned me a recall for the Australia series at home in early 1998. But there was no place for me in the playing eleven in the first Test in Chennai in March 1998. As was typical in those days, if you weren’t playing the Test, you didn’t get to bat in the nets the day before the match, like I didn’t ahead of the second Test in Kolkata. I still went down to Eden in the evening to practise on my own, and it was Harsha Bhogle who bowled to me!

The next morning, I was told that I was playing the Test. Harsha must have given me a good workout, for I danced to 95 and had a big opening stand with Sidhu, but fell with a century beckoning. I had played the ball on its merits and capitalised on the loose ones to ease into the 90s when my old belief that you had to get a century to be acknowledged as a Test player resurfaced. In a hurry to get to my first Test hundred, I became over ambitious against Gavin Robertson’s off-spin. I stood upright and tried to cut the ball even though it wasn’t there for the stroke. I ended up nicking to Ian Healy behind the stumps. Azzu bhai made his customary century in Kolkata and Anil then took over in the second innings as we won the Test by an innings and 219 runs to take a winning 2–0 lead in the three-match series.

The last Test was in Bangalore, and despite Sachin’s 177 and a 24-run firstinnings lead, we lost the dead rubber by eight wickets. My personal contribution was 6 and 15, enough to be dropped for the one-off Test against Zimbabwe in the winter in Harare.

Cold as these words are, I am not sure if they convey the turmoil in my mind. I was in one day, out the next, as if propelled by a revolving door that either pushed me to the outside, or fortuitously dragged me in, according to its whims. A consistent long run would have allowed me to play myself in or out permanently. This game of musical chairs was doing nothing for my morale. I had bowed to the demands of the team and accepted the role of an opener, but I felt that the selectors and the team management always considered me a stopgap despite my best efforts. Every time I underperformed in a couple of innings, the axe hovered over me because I was forever considered the ‘non-regular’ opener. I admit that I should have done more as an opener. Virender Sehwag, for instance, excelled when he was promoted to open the batting in Tests because he stuck to the same game plan that had brought him there. I just wasn’t myself. I didn’t trust my abilities or have the confidence as an opener that I had as a middle-order batsman. Because of the change in my mindset and because I was trying to think like an opener, I curbed my natural instincts and style. It was not surprising that once I altered my approach and became more conservative, the results also changed. If I had got a 167 in my first or second Test as an opener, who knows, my approach towards opening might have been different.

As surely as day follows night, the chop for the Zimbabwe Test was succeeded by a return to the team, this time for the winter tour of New Zealand in 1998. The first Test in Dunedin was to be my comeback because Jadeja had sprained his leg, but the match had to be abandoned due to incessant rain. So as to not disappoint the crowd, we played an exhibition day-night 50-over game with a red ball, and I made 82. Dropped for the second Test, I had been told by Azzu bhai, back as the captain, and Anshuman Gaekwad, our coach, that I would play in the next Test in Hamilton. On the morning of the match, after we arrived at the ground, I was informed that I wasn’t in the eleven. Here we go again!

Almost immediately after we returned from New Zealand, we prepared for the mother of all battles. Pakistan were in India for the first Test series between the sides in our country in more than 11 years, and the hype was enormous. We were fancied to come up trumps in our backyard, but Pakistan had a fantastic bowling attack spearheaded by Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis, with the crafty offspinnerSaqlain Mushtaq capable of being a genuine threat to even the best players of the turning ball.

The first Test in Chennai, in January 1999, was my first game for the country in 10 months, since the Bangalore defeat to Australia. I had a new opening partner in Sadagopan Ramesh, the gifted left-hander from Tamil Nadu. Ramesh showed no sign of nerves as he took on the two Ws on debut and pulled off a flurry of boundaries. While you could never relax for a moment against Wasim and Waqar, I felt in control until, by the eighth or ninth over, the ball began to reverse alarmingly.

I had faced reverse swing before, but not at this pace and bowled with such skill, and most definitely not so early in the innings. It was a totally different ball game, the little red orb darting this way and that, as if magically propelled by exceptional fingers and wondrous wrists. Had I not been at the receiving end, I would have appreciated what Wasim and Waqar were doing. As it turned out, it wasn’t just me that they felled. In a Test match that will go down as one of the classics, Sachin braved a terrible back and single-handedly kept India in the game as we chased 271 for victory. We were in a bad way at 82 for 5, after Sourav was adjudged caught even though the ball appeared to bounce twice, when Sachin was joined by Nayan Mongia. For more than two hours, they raised our hopes while adding 136. Nayan held his end up while Sachin was on top of his game, even though he was in extreme pain and under enormous pressure. His 136 is as good an innings as I have seen. It was a pity that it had to come in a losing cause as we lost our last four wickets for four runs, to go down by 12 runs. For the second time in two years, I saw Sachin weep like a child in the dressing room. And none of us knew how to comfort him. The sporting Chennai crowd applauded the Pakistanis on their victory lap while we were distraught at having snatched defeat from the jaws of victory.

We didn’t have much time to lick our wounds because the next Test was four days away, at Kotla. This time, we got our own back, thanks to the genius of Anil Kumble. Ramesh continued the impressive start to his Test career with halfcenturies in both innings, and there were enough contributions from the rest as we set Pakistan a target of more than 400 to win the game. For nearly two hours, as Saeed Anwar and Shahid Afridi put on 100 for the first wicket, we wondered if that would suffice. It turned out to be more than enough once Anil got into the act.

Anil is the greatest competitor I have played with or against. I’ve never known him to take a backward step or shy away from a challenge. He would be itching for the ball on day one of a Test match in England or South Africa, on pitches that had nothing for the spinner. Even if things weren’t rolling his way, he would bound in ball after ball, always thinking wicket. He had the aggression of the fast bowler and the guile of a spinner. It is no accident that he signed off as India’s highest wicket-taker in Tests.

Once he ended the pesky opening stand by having Afridi caught behind, Anil got on a roll like he often does. The wickets started to tumble, but it wasn’t until Pakistan were eight down that we realised that Anil was on to something special. He had been our match-winner at home for so long that we almost took it for granted that he would bowl us to victory, but when he had eight of eight, the prospect of emulating Jim Laker and picking up all ten in an innings loomed large. For the first time in his life, Srinath bowled not to take wickets, and there was one moment of alarm when Ramesh ran back to try and hold on to a catch off his bowling that was met with the most unparliamentary words from the bowler himself! Anil had done so much for Indian cricket that we wanted him to get all ten more than he probably did. I consider myself extremely privileged to have taken the catch at short leg to dismiss Wasim, Anil’s tenth wicket of the innings. We all converged on the hero, who seemed the calmest person on the field. Even today, I get goose bumps when I recall that Perfect Ten. We had shown our character to bounce back from the Chennai heartbreak and level the series, but I had issues of my own. In both the innings at Kotla, I had got out bowled by Wasim, not having judged the trajectory of the ball either time. Something was off, I was certain. I decided to get my eyes checked back in Hyderabad, in the 10-day gap before the next game, the Asian Test Championship showdown in Kolkata.

Sure enough, the eye test confirmed my fears. I had astigmatism, which is essentially a problem with how the eye focuses light. My vision was getting blurred in overcast conditions. I would have to use contact lenses as a corrective measure. But now that I knew what the problem was, I could work towards overcoming it.

It wasn’t just my eyes that I got tested during that trip to Hyderabad. I realised that getting out bowled so often wasn’t only to do with my vision. A massive technical flaw had crept into my game, its origin stemming from the initial back-and-across movement that I had adopted from the tour of the West  Indies. As I mentioned earlier, my head was falling over to the off-side. Consequently, my left leg was going across and outside the off stump, and I was playing around my front pad with an angled bat. The subsequent bat-pad gap left me susceptible to the ball coming in, which was often expertly exploited by the great Wasim and which explained why I was getting bowled through the gate so often.

I reworked my technique, going into the second stance, which would remain my ally till my retirement. It was my batting coach back home, Ashok Singh, who suggested this. Without getting too technical, the second stance entails widening the gap between the legs when the bowler is about to load, so that you have greater stability. This meant that from my original stance, I moved the left foot a little forward and the right foot a little back. Then, as the bowler was about to release the ball, I went back and across. My head was in a better position, on top of the ball and not falling over.

Because I prepared early for my body to react, I also got a fraction of a second more to get into position. While that really helped me in the following Test, I knew that it was important to get the timing of the movement right. The success of the movement depends entirely on its timing. If I got that wrong, then even against the slowest of bowlers, I would be late on the ball.

Ashok bhai and I worked incessantly on the modified technique in the short time at his disposal. We used a small corridor in his house as the pitch, and he bowled left-handed with scuffed up plastic balls. The more I batted, the more comfortable I felt. Balls that were previously scurrying off to mid-wicket were now going towards mid-on, where I intended them to go.

Armed with new contact lenses and a new stance, I went to Kolkata feeling good. After a first-innings failure, I made 67 in the second, playing Wasim and reverse swing a lot better. One shot I will never forget is digging out an indipping yorker from Wasim and hitting it through mid-wicket for four. It was the clearest sign that my head was still and in a good position, otherwise I would have been rapped on my pads, like I had been in the first Test.

That’s obviously not the only reason I remember that game. On the first morning, we had Pakistan on the mat at 26 for 6 as Srinath ran amok. Pakistan rallied through Moin Khan to reach 185 and our hopes of a big lead evaporated when Shoaib Akhtar produced two excellent yorkers off consecutive deliveries to pack off both Rahul and Sachin. Our 38-run lead evaporated in no time as Saeed Anwar produced a classic, unbeaten 188 out of 316, to single-handedly keep his team in the hunt.

That left us needing 279 for victory, and we started brightly with Ramesh and myself putting on 108 for the first wicket. I had just settled down in the dressing room after being dismissed by Saqlain when Eden erupted. Sachin had been run out at the bowler’s end after an unfortunate collision with Shoaib. His bat got stuck between Shoaib’s legs and, when the ball hit the stumps, it was just short of the crease. As per the rule, he was out but many felt that Pakistan’s appeal for the dismissal was against the spirit of the game. The Kolkata crowd was so incensed that it threw missiles on the field. Eventually, the stadium had to be cleared and the match was played to empty stands.

It was downhill from the time Sachin was dismissed, and Wasim and Shoaib bowled us out for 232. Pakistan, 26 for 6 inside the first hour of the Test, had pulled off an incredible 46-run heist.

We went to Colombo immediately afterwards, for our next game in the Asian Test Championship, and piled on the runs, even though I only managed 11. But Mahela Jayawardene batted for 11 hours for 242 as Sri Lanka kept us on the park for nearly two days. I badly needed a score, but I had little in the tank when we went out to bat a second time. I had never fielded for that long, especially in the enervating humidity of Colombo. The dressing room was a long way beyond the boundary rope, located on the first floor. My legs felt heavy walking up the steps, and everything after that was a rush. You have just ten minutes to have a quick wash, don your gear, get your mind in order, and get back out to bat again. Until then, I had never felt uncomfortable with this routine. But the humidity, the length of the Sri Lankan innings and the fact that I had spent long hours crouching at short leg and silly point had taken a massive toll. I started questioning the wisdom of opening the batting, and I appreciated the demands on an opener even more. I somehow hung in there for two hours but had only 25 runs to show for my labour. I had got eight innings in a row and managed just one half-century. This time, even I couldn’t complain if I got the drop. I couldn’t stop asking myself—had I already played my last Test? At the start of the 1999–2000 season, as India played New Zealand in a three- Test series at home, I was surplus to requirements. Instead, in September 1999, I led the India A team that played Australia A in a limited-overs series in Los Angeles, on dangerous pitches that did little for the confidence of players on either side. Back home, I was scoring runs once again, including a century for Hyderabad, batting at No. 3 against Goa. It was during this match that the team for the tour of Australia was announced, and the selectors felt I had done enough to merit a recall. As if in celebration, I made another hundred in the Ranji Trophy against Andhra, on a slow, low surface at the Gymkhana in Secunderabad. I played as an opener in preparation for what lay ahead.

When we arrived in Australia, I racked up one more century, this time in a warm-up game against Queensland at the Gabba, batting at No. 3 behind Devang Gandhi and Ramesh. It was a strong attack—with quick men Andy Bichel, Adam Dale and Scott Muller, apart from Symonds, the off-spinner—on a pacy surface where, apart from Sachin, the rest struggled. I unleashed 20 fours on my way to 113. Sachin was equally aggressive during his 83, but with the exception of Ramesh who made 43, no one else touched 20. What gave me great satisfaction was that in the space of ten days, I had made runs on a typical Indian track and then followed it up with another substantial knock on a spicy Australian strip, against a high-class bowling unit. I went to Adelaide in a relaxed and confident frame of mind but courted twin failures in the first Test as the one-drop batsman. When Devang was dropped for the Melbourne Test, I returned to opening the batting but had little to show for it. My contributions were 5 and 1 as we were well beaten for the second time in the series.

This entire journey played itself out as I lay on the floor in our hotel room in Sydney, a day before the final Test of the series. As I jerked awake, I told myself that I hadn’t come this far without reason. I recalled the essence of the Gita —nishkama karma, reposing your faith in Lord Krishna and doing your job without worrying about the outcome. I could feel the confidence return.

Even then, I was so sure I had done everything possible to play myself out of the team that when we warmed up for play the next morning, I automatically went to give catches, like I had in Cape Town in 1996. This time, Sourav came up to me and said, ‘Lax, better take a few and bat a bit, you could be going out to face the new ball in 45 minutes.’ I said a silent prayer and decided in that instant that I was done with trying to be the ‘correct’ Test opener who was expected to bat out time. I had tried that approach and it hadn’t worked, so it was only fair that I go back to what had helped me reach this level.

It was with positivity that I strode out alongside MSK Prasad when Sachin won the toss. I wasn’t going to get bogged down. I was going to play my shots. If I felt the ball was there to hit, I was going to be hit it, never mind if it was the first over.

As it turned out, I made a miserable 7 in more than an hour and a half. I played out 60 deliveries, but on a damp pitch and in overcast conditions against Glenn McGrath, Damien Fleming and Brett Lee, I simply couldn’t get going. McGrath finally put me out of my misery. We were shot out for 150 and I had more than 10 hours to reflect on the first innings as Australia replied with 552. I remember standing at slip and telling Sourav, ‘It has always been my dream to score a hundred in Australia, and I reckon I have only one more chance, in the second innings. I am not sure I will play for India ever again if I don’t make a hundred in this Test.’

This state of mind was a constant in the three years that I opened the batting. I had started off visualising playing in front of packed houses, scoring heavily and helping my team, my country, win matches. But I hadn’t come anywhere close to it.

Desperately trying to summon up some positive energy, I reminded myself that aggression had to be my ally when we began our second innings, more than 400 runs behind. But McGrath and Fleming offered no scoring opportunities. On top of that, I was smacked on the helmet by a quick McGrath bouncer that followed me as I tried to sway out of its way.

Like it had in Cape Town when Donald hit me, this shocked me out of my reverie. I would be lying if I said I wasn’t shaken up, but since my childhood, I had always scored heavily when in physical discomfort. McGrath followed up that bouncer with a half-volley that I put away for four, and I was up and running.

When I was caught at first slip by Shane Warne on 54 off a McGrath noball, I felt that some divine power had chosen to sit on my shoulder and drive me forward. The strokes cascaded off the bat, which felt like an extension of my arms. There were a couple of edges that streaked to the fence, but most of my strokes were authentic and precise. There was no desperation in my approach. Australia had set attacking fields with several men in catching positions, and that opened up big gaps in the outfield, which I cashed in on.

I wanted to prove a point to myself, show that I was capable of getting runs at the highest level, against any opposition and under any conditions. I took everything else out of the equation. I didn’t think about past failures, I didn’t worry about what the future held. I was in the zone. I allowed my instincts to take over, and they didn’t let me down. I played like I did for Hyderabad in the Ranji Trophy, with a free and clear mind.

On that quick pitch, I realised that there were so many shots in my repertoire that I had subconsciously put away. The blow to the helmet was instrumental in sharpening my reflexes, and everything else that followed. Out came the drive, the pull, the punch, the cut, the straight drive, the wristy flick. When Warne came on, I stepped out and hit him over mid-wicket, over mid-on, against prodigious turn. After a long time, I was playing the ball and not the bowler. When I became a Test centurion for the first time, I whipped off my helmet and threw my hands up in the air. The look on my face told the story.

Satisfaction and relief competed for centre-stage, and I finally, truly believed that I belonged in international cricket. In some corner of my mind was also the thought that I had bought myself some time. I finally had a three-figure knock. From time to time, I pull out a video of that innings just to relive the drama. There is no better feeling than the appreciation of your mates and peers. The Australian players applauded me as I walked off the ground after being dismissed for 167 off 198 balls. Brett Lee, my good friend, running up to congratulate me after having me caught behind, and the reception I received from our dressing room where everyone was on their feet, are memories that I will cherish forever.

I addressed the media at the end of the game and got the feeling that they were all genuinely happy for me. As I was walking back to our sanctuary, someone tapped me on my shoulder. When I looked up, he shook my hand, clasped my shoulder and said, ‘Young man, you made my day.’ It was John Howard, the Australian prime minister!

Sachin gifted me a pair of Oakley sunglasses to show his appreciation. I knew I owed my selection for the tour to him—he made no secret of the fact that he was a big admirer of my talent, technique and mental strength. Before the warm-up game against Queensland at the Gabba, he had told me, ‘You go out and enjoy yourself.’ I had finally enjoyed myself and Sachin was delighted for me. Kapil paaji, our coach, sent me a big bottle of champagne that eventually ended up in Sachin’s room. And the team management convinced the selectors that I should stay on for the tri-series even though I hadn’t been picked in the original squad. They got their way, but I couldn’t justify their faith as I had a forgettable series.

In six innings against Pakistan and Australia, I made just 24 runs while opening, batting at No. 3 and No. 4. I played out a lot of deliveries—116—for these frugal returns, and we lost all those matches as we embarrassingly crashed out of the tournament.

Between the tri-series in Australia and the two-Test series at home against South Africa was the domestic 50-over Challenger Series in which I was the highest run-getter. Fresh off this, and the Sydney 167, I was hoping to translate my form into runs in the first Test in Mumbai. Instead, I managed only 17 and 0 as we went down in a tight contest. That evening, when I returned from dinner with my roomie Venkatesh Prasad, I found the phone blinking. There was a voice message from Rahul. ‘Bad luck, buddy. I am sure you will bounce back strongly.’ I had no idea why he had left that message, but I had a sinking feeling. I immediately switched on the TV, anxiously surfed the channels and finally discovered that I had been dropped for the next Test in Bangalore. Neither the captain nor the coach had bothered to inform me that I wasn’t needed.

As I was boarding the aircraft to return to Hyderabad, I finally got through to Sachin. All he said was, ‘Just keep working hard, Lachi.’ Only that, nothing else. I landed in Hyderabad, still furious at the turn of events. I had every reason to believe that I deserved a longer run in the wake of the Sydney century, yet I was on the sidelines after just one more Test. It was happening far too often for my liking. That there was no communication from the decision-makers was even more frustrating. I had reached a point where I needed to make some decisions myself.My uncle and I sat down and discussed my career threadbare. We analysed the ups and downs, we chronicled the number of times I had been dropped and recalled. There was no discernible pattern except that whenever I failed in a couple of matches, or whenever we came up against what was considered ‘tough’ opposition, I was left out of the squad because I was, after all these years, still a non-regular opener.

At the end of the chat, we both decided that enough was enough. I would not open the batting for India again.

It wasn’t a lightly made call. The middle order was crammed, and there was no guarantee that even a mountain of domestic runs would earn me a recall. But I was fine with that. The important thing was to play the game for the reason I had first held a bat in my hands—to enjoy myself, to have fun.

In the desire to establish myself in the national team, even if it meant batting in an unfamiliar position with little backing, I seemed to have lost sight of the bigger picture. The tour of Australia was a genuine eye-opener. In India, we have always treated first-class cricket as a stepping stone, as a means to higher honours. Not too many of us have played for our states with the respect and sense of fulfilment the game deserves.

But just looking at the Australian guys I knew so well, good friends like Lee and Symonds, made me understand that while it is laudable to aspire to play for the country, it is possible at the same time to have fun while playing for your state, while playing for any team for that matter. It struck me that even after three-and-a-half years as an India cricketer, I didn’t really know the meaning of playing cricket.

That’s when I made up my mind to play the game on my own terms. I told myself that I would play like a king, not to prove or establish myself. I knew that I had the goods—the Gabba hundred and the SCG 167 were evidence enough. Once that decision was made, my outlook on the game changed. I wanted to have fun, and I still wanted to win matches for the country. To be in a position to win matches, it was important that I played consistently. But the classification of non-regular opener was preventing me from doing so. I had tried my best in that position, but it hadn’t worked out, and it was pulling me down.

I told myself that from now on, I would lead the life of a normal first-class cricketer. I would take pride in contributing to Hyderabad cricket, and play for Indian Airlines, my employers. But I would never open the batting again.