I consider myself extremely fortunate to have played alongside some of the greatest batsmen in the history of the game. To spend upwards of a decade in the same changing room as Sachin, Sourav, Rahul and Viru was exhilarating. I have been a part of many triple-hundred stands with Rahul and Sachin, and it was a pleasure to watch them go about their business from the best seat in the ground. There was a reason why they were successful. Each of them prepared differently, was wired differently, but none of them left anything to chance. For some, batting was a release. For others, it was a cocoon of professionalism, as well as comfort.

VIRENDER SEHWAG

First, a confession. I am an unabashed admirer of Viru. Actually, make that two confessions. When I first saw him bat, I didn’t think he had it in him to be consistently successful at the highest level.

I was exposed to the Viru school of batting in the late 1990s, just after he  had played for India Under-19. He was with the Indian Airlines team as a ‘stipend player’, and while I was impressed with his hitting ability in the startof- the-season tournaments in the south, what struck me was that he tried to smash every ball out of the park. He didn’t seem to have a game plan and his shot selection was all over the place, so he didn’t make too many big scores. He also played under me in the India A side against Australia A in Los Angeles, but again, there wasn’t much to write home about when it came to scores. Towards the end of 1999, Venkatapathi Raju came back from Agartala, raving about Viru. In a Duleep Trophy game against South Zone, Viru had smashed a huge double hundred (274) and Venkat told me that he absolutely tore the bowling apart. South had a very strong spin attack—Venkat himself, Sunil Joshi, Aashish Kapoor (all internationals) and Kanwaljit Singh—and to take them on like Viru did must have been quite something. He then made his ODI debut against Pakistan in Mohali, batting at No. 7 and lasting just two balls before Shoaib Akhtar got him. I gathered that he could play spin very well, but was suspect against pace.

Viru’s unique talent expressed itself during the 2001 ODI series against Australia. In the first match in Bangalore, he blasted 58, took three wickets with his off-spin, and was the man of the match. He stubbed his finger on the ground while fielding, but it wasn’t until we went to Pune for the next match and he had an X-ray done that we came to know that he had sustained a fracture and had to sit out the series.

The night before the Pune match, we had gone out for dinner—Viru, Zak and I. Out of the blue, Viru told me, ‘Laxman bhai, you had a great opportunity to make a triple hundred in the Kolkata Test, but unfortunately, you didn’t. Now you wait and watch, I will become the first Indian to score 300 in Test cricket.’ My jaw dropped and I stared at him in astonishment. This guy had played just four ODIs, wasn’t anywhere close to Test selection, and here he was, making the most outrageous of claims. For a second, I thought he was joking, but Viru was dead serious. To be honest, I didn’t know what to make of it. A couple of months later, we went to Zimbabwe for a tri-series. Ashish Nehra was my roomie, and since Viru often dropped by to meet his Delhi mate, we spent a lot of time together and became a tight group—Ashish, Zak, Viru, Sadagopan Ramesh, Hemang Badani and I. Viru didn’t have a great run and began slowly in the next tournament, another tri-series in Sri Lanka. By then, since Sachin wasn’t available, Sourav had pushed him up to open the batting. After five failures, we all feared the worst until Viru let loose against New Zealand, bringing up his maiden international hundred off just 69 deliveries. It was to be the first of several Viru specials I was privileged to witness from close quarters.

Our next assignment was a tri-series in South Africa before the Test matches, and because he batted well and dominated the bowling, Sourav believed he had the potential to be a match-winner in Test cricket too. That’s how he came to debut in Bloemfontein, announcing his arrival with a breathtaking century under tremendous pressure.

Until that century, made alongside his idol Sachin, Viru too had apprehensions about his long-format game. But that century gave him the confidence that he belonged in Test cricket. It transformed his mindset. It’s not as if he changed his approach or his attitude. It’s just that he discovered the belief that he could hold his own in Test cricket.

Viru is consistent in the way he thinks, and he always looked to play the game in much the same way, irrespective of the situation, the conditions and the quality of the opposition attack. It made for great spectacle. All of us have a tendency to change our approach depending on touch, rhythm and form, in addition to the above factors. For Viru, none of that made a difference. Sometimes, because he lived by the sword, he also died by it, but that was a compromise he was willing to make and it was a luxury Sourav and successive captains allowed him. It wasn’t until later, towards the end of his career and especially with his eyesight acting up, that his unique mindset led to his downfall more often than it brought him success.

Despite his debut hundred, it was difficult to slot Viru into the middle order, so Sourav and John Wright asked him to open the batting in the Tests on our tour of England in the summer of 2002. Ahead of the first Test at Lord’s, we played a practice game in Southampton, and it was during a cab ride that Viru told me what the think tank had in mind for him. Falling back on my own past experience, I told Viru not to agree to open. We had become good enough friends for me to share with him my travails as a makeshift opener. I urged him to wait for his chance in the middle order because I believed that would be the most beneficial for him.

Viru patiently heard me out but then decided that he was alright with opening in Tests. His contention was that he wanted to play Test matches, not sit outside and watch and wait for things to unravel. ‘Whatever has to happen will happen, VVS (I was no longer Laxman bhai),’ he told me philosophically. I am glad he didn’t take my advice to heart.

In his very first innings as a Test opener, Viru made a blazing 84 at Lord’s. Even at that early stage, a slight technical adjustment was obvious. While his mindset was all about attacking and playing a free-flowing game, he also started to play a lot straighter, especially at the start of the innings. There prevailed a perception that Viru hardly thought about his game. I beg to differ. He understood his game, he knew what his strengths and weaknesses were, and he had a game plan that revolved around simplicity. If the ball was pitched in areas where he wasn’t comfortable, he would look for a single. If it was in an area of his strength, his first thought was a four or a six.

I believe that opening the innings gave Viru the opportunity to become a more organised player, and therefore he was able to play all those brilliant innings. There was a consistent pattern to the manner in which he scored. He seldom pulled, but if the ball was short and wide, it would fly over point for six. Early in the innings, if the ball was pitched up, he would only play in the V, either over the infield or along the turf. And the moment the spinners came on, the ball had to go, high in the air.

Because of his exceptional hand-eye coordination, Viru had the rare ability to hit even a length ball along the ground without stretching a lot. He could also hit the same ball for a six. I have seen the best of spinners appear clueless against him—even the great Muttiah Muralitharan was at sixes and sevens when Viru went after him in Galle in 2008, and at the CCI in 2009. As he grew more and more confident, life became easier for us middle-order batsmen. Any Viru innings of even reasonable substance deflated and demoralised the bowlers because he hit even the good balls for fours and sixes.

Viru’s preparation was unlike anything the rest of us did. He kept things to a bare minimum. I have never seen him over-prepare. He would bat in the nets, take his quota of catches, and then retire to the dressing room—no extra throwdowns, no additional knocking. He semi-mocked us: ‘You must play more balls in the match, not at practice.’ You can’t argue with that logic, not when it worked so often for him. He also loved daring the bowlers. In Multan in 2004, for instance, before Saqlain Mushtaq ran in to bowl, Viru told him that he would hit him over long-on for six, and went on to do precisely that. Or he would challenge Shoaib Akhtar and pull it off. He was that confident of his abilities. Having modelled his game on Sachin’s, Viru’s head position was also his strength. Even though he didn’t use his feet as much as some of the others did, because his head was so still, he could use his beautiful hands to hit through the line of the ball. He had the special ability to play with the full face of the bat, but also use his wrists to on-drive or cut the ball. Players of an earlier era have raved about GR Viswanath sir’s cutting. I didn’t see GRV sir bat at his peak. But anyone who fielded at point could vouch for how rapidly the ball travelled when Viru cut it. It was not a conventional shot, where he got on top of the ball. Viru’s cut was almost like a slice—along the ground or in the air, depending on where the fielders were placed. Ahead of and after the matches, we all watched videos to gauge the strength of the opposition bowlers and how we had got out to them. All Viru had on his iPad were his fours and sixes, and he watched only those. He was not obsessed with his technique, even though technically, he was as sound as a batsman with two Test triples is bound to be. His philosophy was that it was only the mind that could make you a success or a failure. He therefore put pressure on the bowlers, played with their minds and came out on top more often than not.

After the Multan triple hundred, he came up to me and laughed, ‘I told you so, VVS.’ I couldn’t have been happier that my 281 had been surpassed. For a country that had given the world so many great batsmen, not having a triple centurion was an aberration. Viru set that record straight. It had taken him less than three years to translate his prophecy into reality. I was curious to know where he had got the confidence from to make that prediction in Pune. ‘In order to get to a triple, you have to score very quickly, VVS,’ he explained, as if to a child. ‘You need to play a lot of shots and get your runs very quickly. In this Indian team, I didn’t see anyone else doing that.’ It was said not with arrogance, but from an understanding of his game and inherent intelligence. He knew that he had a better chance than anyone else of getting to 300 because of the nature of his game, high-risk but also high-reward, as the records indicate.

Viru’s one-day record isn’t as glittering as his Test record, and I feel he could and should have done better in white-ball cricket. He was so organised in the longer version, respecting the opener’s slot, but when it came to 50-over cricket, and later Twenty20 cricket, he felt he had the licence to go after the ball right from the start. That led to his downfall because he wanted to hit every ball out of the park. In Test matches, he respected the balls pitched in areas he wasn’t comfortable with. That wasn’t the case in the limited-overs versions, which to me will remain a bit of a surprise.

His carefree, almost careless, approach to one-day cricket used to frustrate  John no end. He repeatedly urged Viru to not throw his hand away after racing into the 20s and 30s. In a tri-series game at The Oval against Sri Lanka in 2002, Viru played a rash drive and was dismissed for 12. There was a commotion in the dressing room on his return, and once things settled down, we learned that John had grabbed him by the collar, pulled him to his feet and yelled that Viru didn’t respect his words. Viru wanted to return home to India, but when he calmed down, he realised that John had only his best interests at heart. That, ironically, was the start of a beautiful relationship between the coach and his principal destroyer, a relationship Viru was to replicate with Gary Kirsten when the latter became our coach.

Apart from being a smart thinker, Viru was also a useful off-spinner. He repeatedly got me out in local tournaments in Delhi, and rejoiced that VVS was his ‘bunny’. He had the loop and the trajectory, the ball would naturally go above the batsman’s eyeline and dip wickedly. He bowled less and less after he picked up a shoulder injury, which was a bit of a shame because he was one of the most dangerous off-spinners I have encountered.

Viru the person is pretty similar to Viru the batsman. He is honest and upfront, and what you see of Viru is what you get from him. Even when he got out to a poor shot, I didn’t see him come back and sulk in the dressing room. We beat ourselves up if we were dismissed through a bad stroke, but Viru just took his pads off and horsed around as usual. I once asked him if he didn’t feel bad at having let himself and the team down. ‘Yes, I do,’ he replied. ‘As I am walking back towards the dressing room, I think about the stroke, about the mistake I made. I berate myself, tell myself that I won’t repeat the mistake. That’s it. Why should I mope once I am in the dressing room? It will serve no purpose; instead, it will most likely affect the others.’ I haven’t come across a single other person who has a similar approach.

Blessed with the rare gift to laugh at himself, Viru was a livewire in the changing room. He was always laughing and making others crack up, taking it upon himself to keep the atmosphere light. He was an exceptional team man, but often misunderstood because he was brutally honest and spoke the truth to your face. He never spoke behind anyone’s back, and he doesn’t know what it means to be diplomatic. That is both his strength and his weakness. Those who are close to him understand where he is coming from. Others are quick to label him arrogant and cocky. I know him as a warm-hearted and helpful person who would do anything for his friends. He is one of my dear friends, someone whose company I enjoy immensely.

In England in 2011, Viru came into the side only for the last two Tests. I don’t know where he hunted it down, but on his comeback in Birmingham, above his locker, hung a placard that read, ‘Don’t try to understand me, just love me.’ Vintage Viru.

RAHUL DRAVID

My first interaction with Rahul was when I was 16 and we were playing in the South Zone Under-19 tournament. Rahul had already started to make a name for himself in the junior circuit. He was two years my senior, and I was curious to see what made him tick.

My memories of that game are vivid. Wearing an India shirt, which I later came to know had been gifted to him by Roger Binny, Rahul made a brilliant hundred at the Chinnaswamy Stadium. My first impression was that he was very studious, but also classy and stylish. From that game on, I became a big fan of Rahul. He was clearly the best batsman at that level, but there was no arrogance, no starry airs about him. Even as I was caught up in my journey, I followed his scores through the newspapers and felt happy by association every time he made a good score. Rahul and I played a lot of domestic cricket together for South Zone in the Duleep Trophy. Since we were slotted next to each other, we batted as a pair quite often and had several big stands in first-class cricket before replicating those partnerships in the international arena. What I remember from our Duleep Trophy days in the 1994–95 season was that he was so obsessed with playing for India that even some of us juniors felt that if he didn’t break through soon enough, he could lose it mentally. He was always a very intense person, and he would write down his scores on the back of his bat. I found that a little worrying. The more time I spent with him, the more I came to admire Rahul. His work ethic was exemplary, and from our first day together in a dressing room to the last, I never saw him taking shortcuts as far as preparation was concerned. It remained his top priority till his final day as a cricketer, and as he matured, he paid even more attention to it, if that were possible. It was something he took a lot of pride in.

When I say preparation, it isn’t limited to just one thing. He also paid a great deal of attention to his fitness. Rahul seemed to think that for him to succeed, the only route was to put in hours and hours of practice—on his batting, his fitness, his fielding.

Only those who were physically present when he hit the nets have any inkling of how much effort he put into his cricket. He rarely spoke about the time spent at practice, but when I went to the Chinnaswamy Stadium during the off-season, the bowlers who bowled to him at nets talked about how he was in the ground from dawn to dusk. If there was anyone who used the NCA in Bengaluru to the fullest, it was Rahul. He knew what his strengths were. Equally importantly, he was aware of the areas that needed work, and he was honest with himself about these.

Every time I met him after a break, I could see that he had worked on what he perceived were his weaknesses, be it fitness or batting. Rahul wasn’t shy of seeking professional help with regard to his fitness, but he didn’t follow routines blindly. His approach was structured. He tried to understand the programmes the trainers chalked out for him, he asked questions, and once he bought into their line of thought, he devoted himself to the routine. Only when you are convinced that something will benefit you can you truly improve.

Rahul was an old-school batsman who focused a lot on technique. The more balls he played at nets, the more he developed his muscle memory. But he was seldom satisfied. He wanted to be known as an all-round batsman, and if he felt he had technical issues, he worked zealously to correct them. He was never hesitant to try out new strokes and expand his repertoire. He sought out people he trusted to ask them what he could do to get better. It was this constant desire to learn and become better that set him apart. Rahul was a top-order batsman but he couldn’t bat higher than number four or five in the one-day side because of the presence of Viru, Sachin and Sourav. He batted in a position not natural to him, in a format not necessarily suited to his style, yet he concluded his career as one of the best finishers. I don’t think I can pay him a bigger compliment. But above all, the one area where I believe Rahul put in a lot of work was in mental fitness. He was a master of visualisation, and from 2000 onwards, he used that as well as long hours of practice to work on his one-day cricket. From the start, he appeared most suited to the longer format, and doubts were raised about his one-day batting. But through unstinting practice, visualisation and a strong will, he enhanced his limited-overs batting and established himself as one of the key members of the Indian 50-over side.

Visualisation is a combination of the conscious and the subconscious. The things we do, we usually do at a conscious level. Rahul used visualisation to ensure that everything he did registered at a subconscious level because when the subconscious takes over during a match, your reactions become quicker and your instincts sharper. A day before the match, he would sit behind the stumps and embrace the ground. As I discovered more about his routine and its benefits, I too used the visualisation technique to my advantage.

At practice, we sometimes worked on a particular shot. After I played the shot over and over again, I closed my eyes and went into a relaxed, peaceful state. The images of that specific stroke would run through my mind. The power of the mind is such that it doesn’t distinguish between imagining something and actually doing it. The best results come when you physically play a stroke, then mentally register what you did, and how you did it. Visualisation is most effective when your mind is calm and blank. Sitting pitch-side the day before a game, I would play out the entire innings in my mind. I imagined the noise of the crowd, the feel of the dressing room. I pictured walking out and taking guard, then settling into my stance. I thought of Glenn McGrath running in and bowling a bouncer that I swayed out of the way of. I imagined pulling the same ball in front of mid-wicket for four once I had got my eye in. More than once, events played out in an extraordinarily similar fashion the following day.

Rahul once told me that very early in his career, he worked out that for him to score runs, he had to play a lot of balls. He felt he didn’t have enough shots, which came as a massive shock, because to me, he had all the shots in the book and he played them too.

In a lot of ways, Rahul and I are very similar to each other—in our approach to batting, in our family backgrounds, in the way we think. We were among the last generation of batsmen who played not for runs but for time. Our games revolved around batting session by session and playing to the merit of the ball. Rahul put a huge price on his wicket. No matter how many runs he had made, if he was disappointed at a particular mode of dismissal, he would do a lot of shadow practice, he would net and face throw-downs to ensure he didn’t repeat the mistake. In that sense, he was a perfectionist, though he was smart enough to make sure he didn’t lose sight of the bigger picture in his quest for perfection.

I haven’t seen a more committed and complete team man than Rahul. He would do anything for the need or betterment of the team. He would agree to keep wicket, or field at short leg even if his preferred close-in position was first slip. He was very accommodating, sometimes too much so. He wasn’t a big fan of keeping wicket but he knew that he had to do so for the sake of balance in the team leading up to the 2003 World Cup. Not only did he accept the role, but he also worked hard on his glove work and brought value to the team. He opened the batting and scored runs in tough conditions in Test cricket, and uncomplainingly dropped down to No. 6 if the captain so demanded. And he did all this without fuss, never making it look like he was doing anyone a favour. Rahul didn’t believe in showing emotion on the park. He used to look up to Steve Waugh, or Tugga, as the Aussie was known—we sometimes ribbed him by calling him Junior Tugga—and wanted to conduct himself like Steve did. His take was that if you displayed emotion, people might label you soft, not tough enough mentally. Whether through conscious effort or naturally, Rahul invariably kept a tight lid on the field.

While he took great pride in his own performances, nothing delighted him more than the team’s victory. After we won the Adelaide Test in 2003, he just would not change out of his whites or take off the dirty cap he had worn while striking the winning run. The match had concluded late in the afternoon, but till well into the night, he walked around with a big smile on his face, still in his whites. It was one of the few occasions when he really let go.

We spent a lot of time standing next to each other in the slips, and I marvelled at his wonderful catching skills. When a catch can come to you at any stage of the day, it is important to be able to concentrate for long periods of time —you must focus at the right time, but also be able to relax. Through practice more than anything else, this became almost second nature to Rahul. He was skilled, undoubtedly, but the way he was able to control his mind made him even better as a slipper.

We talked a lot while standing in the slips, but very little of it pertained to what was happening in front of us. Both of us realised that it was essential to lighten up between deliveries, so we engaged in some delightful non-cricketing conversations. We both read a lot and listened to motivational talks, so there was a ready common ground. As we grew older and our families grew, our conversations shifted to our children—about school, vacations and holidays. If we did talk cricket at all, it was about the domestic stage, about upcoming talent, about the fortunes of our respective state sides, but never about the current match. Talk flowed easily because mentally, we were in sync on many issues. Rahul had got married a few months before I did, and I took tips from him on how to organise my wedding, the reception, how to inform the media, whom to invite. Once again, I was amazed at how meticulous and systematic he was. Rahul the person is exactly like Rahul the batsman.

When we batted, however, strange as it might sound, we hardly had any conversations. I knew what he was thinking, he knew what I was thinking, and that is a pretty special bond. We never tried to interfere in the other’s approach. That was our strength as a pair, but we definitely enjoyed feeding off each other’s energy. I felt a level of comfort, a sense of security when I batted alongside Rahul. I don’t know why, but there was this bubble of calmness when Rahul was my partner. Maybe I was afraid that the bubble would burst if we spoke a lot between overs.

As a person, Rahul is very simple. He took his parents’ philosophy— simple living, high thinking—to heart. He is not very flamboyant, and has never craved materialistic things. He wasn’t obsessed with designer clothes, branded watches, fancy sunglasses or flashy cars. These things didn’t matter to him at all. What mattered was achieving his goals. Rahul overachieved by being committed to his craft. He is a true role model. When you are committed and work towards improving yourself in every aspect and make all the sacrifices so that you are better than the best, then you can achieve more than your ability might suggest. I put his achievements in ODIs and the way he approached his T20 cricket entirely down to his single-minded quest for excellence.

As captain, Rahul enjoyed a lot of success in both formats. We enjoyed Test series wins in England and West Indies, we won a Test match in South Africa for the first time, and we won a record 16 ODI matches in a row, chasing. He was very aggressive, and insisted on effort above anything else, though with time, the cares of captaincy wore him down.

I did hear from those in the ODI setup then that he liked to follow a set, rigid pattern, and wanted players to heed it too. I understand each captain will have his own game plan, but Rahul was probably more unyielding in that regard. Rahul was so introverted that I sometimes wondered if even his wife Vijeta or his parents knew what was going on in his mind, although, post retirement, he has loosened up and seems to be enjoying his time as a coach, particularly with the India Under-19 team. He was reserved when he met new people, but once he got to know them, he would open up and chat quite easily. Having equipped himself with an abundance of knowledge in various disciplines, Rahul is one of the most rounded, eloquent cricketers I have met.

SACHIN TENDULKAR

At an age when I was battling desperately to establish myself at the domestic age-group level, Sachin was playing against the best in the world in international cricket, not just holding his own but also stamping his authority. The novelty of a curly-haired, baby-faced teen quickly made way for awe as he handled unfamiliar pace in alien conditions like the champion he was. With his deeds, he became an inspiration to every young Indian cricketer. It was no different in my case.

When Sachin was taking on Pakistan in his maiden series, I was playing for the South Zone Under-15 side. I was also playing in Hyderabad with Ensconce CC, captained by Arshad Ayub. During one of our net sessions, Arshad bhai asked us about our goals for the season. I said I wanted to play for Hyderabad Under-16. Arshad bhai told me, ‘There is this 16-year-old kid who has just made his Test debut against Pakistan. He has made runs against Imran Khan, Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis. Don’t you think your targets should be a little higher?’ Arshad bhai’s words told me how much faith he had in my abilities, but they were also intended to shake me up, and they did. I was hooked to Sachin.

What I loved was his free spirit, be it in his batting or bowling. After a tour to New Zealand in 1994, he came to Cuddapah to play an exhibition match, and it was my first ‘live’ sighting of the genius. I didn’t figure in the eleven, so I watched with astonishment as he smashed the bowlers out of the park with ridiculous ease. He was so fearless that it took your breath away.

My first taste of the mayhem Sachin could wreak was during a Wills Trophy match in Rajkot in late 1995. For the first three overs, he struggled against our Hyderabad new-ball attack of NP Singh and Vishnuvardhan because they were just too slow for him. But he quickly adjusted to the lack of pace and then took them apart, racing to his century by the 16th over. That was also the first time I spoke to him—rather, he spoke to me. Venkatapathi Raju dragged me over and introduced me to Sachin. When he told me that he had been following my progress—I had just completed a successful Under-19 series against Australia and England—I couldn’t believe my ears. Sachin had established himself as a youth icon. For him to keep tabs on a relatively unknown domestic player was huge for me.

I was still in awe of him when I was picked for the Australia Test in 1996. It was his first Test as captain and he must have had so many things on his mind, yet he went out of his way to make me feel comfortable and relaxed. The longer I shared a dressing room with him, the more I understood how much pride he took in representing the country. He had the tricolour glued to his coffin, and when he put on the India colours, it was as if he grew 10 feet tall. He was thinking excellence and greatness, and he was well on his way to getting there.

With his deeds, Sachin set a stirring example. His fearlessness wasn’t restricted to going out and taking on the bowlers. He was also desperate to take on responsibility in challenging situations. He craved pressure. He almost snatched the ball from Azzu bhai in the last over of the Hero Cup semi-final against South Africa in 1993 when South Africa needed only six to win. That showcased his mental strength. It is one thing to have talent; managing the pressure is another matter altogether. It can do funny things to even the most experienced player. Sachin enjoyed tough situations, they brought the best out of him. Watching him, I learnt that if I shied away from challenges, I would never be a success at the highest level.

He was blessed with great balance, and that is what batting is all about. I never saw his head falling away. It was so still, his weight distribution so good, and his bat came down from the back-lift like a pendulum—like we were taught by our coaches. I haven’t come across anyone else who understood the game, the bowling and the mind of a bowler, any bowler, like Sachin did. Depending on the conditions and the bowlers, he had the ability to make minor changes to his technique and approach without compromising on the basics.

The one instance that stands out for me came early in my career, during the Cape Town Test against South Africa on the 1996–97 tour. Allan Donald was at his fiery best, and the Newlands strip had a lot of pace as well as carry. Until that innings, Sachin used to have his bat behind his right foot in his stance. But during throw-downs before the start of our innings, he started to place the bat between his feet. I was knocking by his side, and was stunned at how easily he adapted to that adjustment. Obviously, it wasn’t only at the nets that he was comfortable with the new stance, because he went out and hammered the bowling to the tune of 169 extraordinary runs. Because of his balance, he could try out new things and keep fine-tuning his game. He was god-gifted, no doubt about that, but he didn’t take the gift for granted. I have seen him work harder than most people to hone that gift with unmatched commitment.

I have briefly alluded to Sachin’s ability to read the mind of a bowler. As a batsman, you want to be in the correct position before the ball comes to you. That’s why it is said that great batsmen have a fraction of a second more to play the ball. You basically pick up the line and length earlier than most, and wait for the ball to come to you to play the shot. But Sachin was one step ahead of even that. Most of us reacted after the ball left the bowler’s hand. But with Sachin, there was the pre-emptive strike. All of us mortals would look for cues from how the bowler was running in, what his wrist position was, how he was loading. But this guy almost instinctively knew what was coming his way even before the bowler started to load. You might call it guesswork or intuition, I prefer preemption. And nine times out of ten, he would be correct. That’s why he was ready with the shot much before anyone else, and that’s why he toyed with even the best bowlers.

With the passage of time, through a combination of maturity and a growing hunger for runs, Sachin remodelled his game to become more risk-free. In the early stages of his career, he played several special knocks but didn’t score as many hundreds as he could have. His idol was Sir Viv Richards, whom bowlers feared. Sachin had that same attitude—smash and demoralise the bowlers, never mind the situation. But, by my estimation, maybe from 2000 onwards, after our tour of Australia, he wasn’t as consistently explosive as he had been earlier. The cares and challenges of captaincy during his second stint brought about a change in Sachin’s thinking. He must have realised that for the team to succeed on a regular basis, it was imperative that he make hundreds at the very least. Gradually, he had to make further compromises to his aggressive outlook as his body began to rebel, but as he morphed from a fearless destroyer to a more controlled accumulator, he lost none of his flair.

The one thing that amazed me throughout the length of his career was how he handled the burden of expectations from the entire country. For almost 25 years, the fans felt that India stood a chance as long as Sachin was batting, and that once he was dismissed, the team would lose. I can’t imagine what it was like to have to carry that pressure for so long. Fortunately, there was no such pressure from within the setup, at least from 2001 onwards, with the rest of his middleorder colleagues already at least four years old in Test cricket.

After that Australia series in 1999–2000 when we were routed 3–0 and he was often fighting a solitary battle, Sachin seemed to have made up his mind that while he was at his attractive best playing free-flowing knocks, the team would only benefit when he scored heavily. His determination to score big runs became more and more apparent as he turned to meditation, and focused on concentration and breathing exercises. With the passage of time and the injuries that ravaged his body, the way he approached the game changed. Instead of the attacking Tendulkar of earlier days, he became a bit more restrained. There was more grinding and grafting, but his voracious appetite never left him. That’s why he finished with a hundred centuries. His hunger to score in every match, his desire to win games for his team, no matter which side or what grade of cricket, was apparent till the very end.

As much as it may appear that way, Sachin is not a freak of nature. Talented he is, but his sincerity, his preparation and commitment to the game were second to none. When he burst forth as a teenager, I have been told, he used to have a lot of fun in the nets. He would bat without a care in the world, taking on the best bowlers in the team and smashing them around. With time, his preparation became very precise and meaningful. The transition at the nets from playful to meticulous was incredible, and I watched transfixed. He batted in the nets the way he wanted to in a match—get behind the ball, account for reverse swing, identify which boundaries to target. If we were playing England, say, he would practise to neutralise James Anderson, to compensate for swing and play the cover drive. And then, come match day, he would replicate the shots in the game that he had practised and perfected in the nets.

It took me a long time to get to know Sachin. By nature, I am reserved and introverted, and I was convinced Sachin was a step too high for me. I was hesitant to initiate any conversation with him, but I was always a good listener and picked up plenty of cues just being around him. I have also been part of several huge partnerships with him, but the one I treasure the most is our 104- run stand in Sharjah against Australia in 1998, in what is called the Desert Storm match. That April evening, and two nights later on his twenty-fifth birthday, Sachin was at his most destructive in one-day cricket. He has played several blistering knocks before and since, but there was a ruthlessness to his batting on those two nights that I haven’t seen at any other time, even though he was nursing a terribly painful right elbow. Our last league game of the Coca Cola Cup was against the Aussies, and while we could afford to lose, we had to meet a run-rate requirement to move past New Zealand into the final. Australia amassed 284 for 7, a huge total 20 years ago. We were wobbling at 138 for 4 with only 21 overs left when I joined him. We had batted for about half an hour when a dust storm swept through the ground and play was halted.

I eased into the cool of the dressing room but Sachin chose to stay outside despite the humidity. He listened to music on his yellow sports Walkman, shutting out everything else around him. He had two broad choices when it came to music—fast-paced stuff when he wanted to charge himself up, and soothing songs if his mind was in turmoil and he was looking for calm. That evening, with the beats thumping in his ears, he was like a warrior ready for battle.

When play resumed, we had to cross the magic figure of 237 to reach the final, and 94 in 15 overs to win the match. Sachin took it upon himself to take us home because he believed he had the ability to do it. Standing at the nonstriker’s end, I felt that my presence didn’t even register with him. He tore into the Australians with towering straight sixes but the shot of the night was a cut drive off Shane Warne, front foot plonked down the pitch. There was a bit of grip in the surface, Warne was at his peak and getting the ball to drift, and he had a man at cover and another manning the fence. Sachin hit the ball with such ferocity that no one moved as it zinged into the advertising board.

During our partnership, he was keen to hog most of the strike and let loose a verbal volley when I was late in responding for a second run. I was new to the team and nervously approached him at the end of the over, expecting a ‘Don’t worry, I didn’t mean it’ from him. But he looked in the zone, perhaps not even aware that he had screamed at me. It was only after the match that he told me he had got carried away and had shouted in the heat of the moment.

As his innings progressed, I saw how helpless the Aussies looked. They were then the masters of the cricket world, but they had no clue how to stop the bleeding. I saw awe and a little fear in their eyes. I believe that Sachin is God’s child, born to play cricket. The dust storm that night was the transference of the force of the Almighty to him. Australia had two storms to contend with, and they could conquer neither.

While we had highly qualified coaches, Sachin was the one I relied on when I had problems with my batting. However, it was only after the Australia tour of 1999–2000 that the ice was broken and I began to feel more comfortable around him.

Sachin talks technique and mindset like almost no one else I know. When we got to know each other well, our non-cricketing discussions veered to religion and family values. He loved talking about his parents, his upbringing— we had several long and meaningful chats, the memory of which I still cherish. My first exposure to the inner world of Sachin was in the summer of 2001. Bhajji and I had been signed up by Sporting Frontiers, a player-management firm, and since we were in Mumbai, Sachin invited us home for dinner. After an event to formally announce our association with the firm at the Cricket Club of India, I had to travel to Colaba for a photo shoot and an interview  with a magazine. From there, I was to go over to Sachin’s Bandra residence.

The photo shoot was an extended affair and was done only by 8.00 p.m. I thought I would reach his house by 9.00 p.m., but the traffic was crazy and it took me more than two and a half hours to get to his place. I called him thrice to apologise for the delay. I was embarrassed that I had made the great Sachin Tendulkar wait for so long.

When I got there just before 11.00 p.m., I realised that dinner hadn’t been served. Sachin, Bhajji and Anjali were waiting for me. I was touched and apologetic, but there was not a trace of annoyance or displeasure on either Sachin’s or Anjali’s face. Sachin showed me around his home, took me to meet his lovely mother despite the late hour, and it was only then that we sat down to dinner. Anjali herself heated up the food and served us, before joining us for dinner.

It was then that I realised why Sachin was as grounded as he was. He had a great support system around him. He loved talking about his parents and the values he had picked up from them. Like them, Anjali too treated him like a regular guy as she played the perfect host. And Sachin never behaved like a prima donna. Given the position he was in, he could so easily have got carried away, but he always conducted himself with dignity and poise.

Circumstances forced Sachin to grow up very quickly. Even as a teenager, it was difficult for him to lead a normal life because of the constant scrutiny and the massive following he attracted. But with close friends in an indoor setting, he can be quite a riot. He loves being a practical joker even today, and enjoys having a playful laugh at a friend’s expense. He takes a keen interest in most sports, and whenever we had a TT table in our team room, he would spend every free minute playing ping-pong. Even there, he hated losing, so the competition would become very intense.

I wouldn’t have imagined that someone so obsessed with cricket could be so well versed in cars, watches and music. Sachin is not merely interested in these, but is greatly knowledgeable too. We share a similar taste in Hindi music, but I must say that heavy metal, which he so adores, isn’t my cup of tea. For me, Sachin is a hero-turned-friend-hero, a man of many firsts but essentially a simple soul. I am touched at the kind of respect he has continued to give Ramakant Achrekar sir, his coach during his earlier days. I admire Sachin Tendulkar the cricketer, but I am privileged to be friends with Sachin Tendulkar the person.

SOURAV GANGULY

Before I got into the Indian dressing room in 1996, I knew little about Sourav beyond the obvious. We had travelled to Sharjah the previous year under Vikram Rathour as part of the India A team, and he had got a hundred for East Zone against South Zone in the Duleep Trophy. In the subsequent Deodhar Trophy game in Lucknow, he had dismissed me, clean bowled. That was the extent of our relationship. I was aware that there was much hype around Sourav, him being from Kolkata and all. That he had gone to Australia in 1991–92 as part of the one-day team. But back then, we had no rapport to speak of.

It was only after I broke into the Indian Test team that I had my first real conversation with him. He was quiet and soft-spoken, but you could see that the two hundreds in his first two Tests in England had also made him a very confident young man.

While Sourav was a very good Test batsman, he was extraordinary in white-ball cricket. It was almost as if he was competing with Sachin for the tag of the best one-day batsman in the world. He started off as a middle-order batsman in 50-over cricket but it was when he was pushed up the order to open the batting that he began to make people sit up and take notice. It was unbelievable how rapidly he transformed his game. In a short span of time, he became one of the most dangerous batsmen in world cricket, and his partnership with Sachin at the top of the order was lethal.

To see him match Sachin stroke for stroke in one-day cricket was an absolute treat. Sachin had several more years of experience than Sourav, but theirs was an alliance of equals. When Sourav first burst into the public’s consciousness with his twin hundreds in Test cricket in England, he was essentially a touch player who relied on timing. He had the unique gift of caressing the ball through the off-side, with even defensive pushes thudding into the boundary boards. But as he started opening the batting in one-day cricket, he worked on his power game as well.

He figured out how to use the field restrictions to his advantage, how to clear the infield with ridiculous ease. He always played the high percentage shots, generally hitting the ball in the air in the V, but he also started to use the crease exceedingly well. Against the spinners, his hitting ability was second to none, and he cleared any ground with effortless ease. Sourav’s strength was his mind. He knew which bowler to target, and whom to play out with minimal risk. Those traits are important if you are to be a successful limited-overs cricketer; I haven’t seen anyone develop and improve more rapidly in one-day cricket than Sourav.

In Test cricket, once he dropped down from No. 3 to 5 and 6, the hundreds weren’t as readily forthcoming. I can understand the situation because I have also played a lot at No. 5 and 6; I believe that if Sourav had got more opportunities up the order, he could have scored many more centuries. He was brilliant on the off-side, he was excellent against the spinners, and he was streetsmart as well as intelligent. As his career progressed and teams had more access to information about him, he began to think the opposition would target him with bouncers, and that made him compromise on his footwork.

The responsibility of captaincy seems to have affected his free-flowing batting in both formats. Also, the entire Greg Chappell saga affected his batting as well. To me, the best of Sourav came between 1996 and 2000, and then towards the end of his career, from late 2006 till his retirement in November 2008.

While Sourav will always, rightly, be hailed as a great one-day batsman, he played some significant and important hands in Test cricket, especially overseas where, contrary to popular belief, he actually enjoyed the ball coming on to the bat. I watched most of his 144 against Australia at the Gabba in 2003 from the non-striker’s end, and was struck by both, his command over the bowling and his determination to make a statement in the first Test of the series.

A fiercely proud competitor, Sourav wanted to be known as the best batsman to come out of India, and he worked very hard towards that. His offside game is the best I have seen till date, though he was a little restricted on the on-side, especially when the bowlers targeted his ribcage. Word gets around fast in international cricket, and all the teams started to bowl short at his body to try and tie him down. In ODIs, Sourav was able to counter that by moving across his stumps or backing away and crashing the ball square on the off-side. Test cricket required more patience, so he bided his time and waited for the ball to be bowled in his areas of strength.

Apart from the Gabba hundred, his Test innings that stand out for me are the brilliant century at Headingley in 2002 when he ditched conventional wisdom and opted to bat first, and the double hundred against Pakistan in late 2007 when we were under pressure on a track that was slow but played a little up and down. When he put his mind to it, Sourav could guts it out and never take a backward step. However, I think he needed a challenge to rouse himself into action, because the cares of captaincy were otherwise making too many demands on his time and energy. A somewhat complicated and complex human being, Sourav was galvanised by the need to prove a point, which explains his stirring late run in Test cricket after being dropped from the side.

For me, the legacy Sourav has left behind is as one of the most successful and exceptional leaders in world cricket. He was so passionate about the team doing well that at times, he compromised on his own batting. I feel fortunate to have played under him and he was one of my favourite captains.

When Sourav and John came together in 2000, they had a big task on their hands. The team was in the throes of transition, and the match-fixing episode had disillusioned the fans. The qualities Sourav displayed in that difficult period were exemplary and worthy of emulation by any leader. He transformed the mindset of the Indian cricketer. It wasn’t just about numbers and results anymore. He wanted to erase the fear of failure from the minds of the players. When he saw a spark in younger players, the confidence he gave them was inspiring. He allowed them to play freely, play their natural game, and not worry about their positions. He was constantly in their ear, making them feel a hundred feet tall, and it is no coincidence that a plethora of future match-winners—Zak, Bhajji, Kaif, Yuvi, Nehra and, to some extent, Irfan—were all nurtured by Sourav.

The way Sourav thought about the game was very different from what I had been exposed to. Ahead of Australia’s tour of India in 2001, we were unsure about our spin options, with Anil out with a shoulder injury. I was leading India A against the Australians in a three-day game in Nagpur. Standing at slip, I was astounded at how much bounce Bhajji was getting off the strip, and the pace at which he was bowling. He was in complete command of his craft, and I was convinced that he should be a part of the Test team.

At lunch on the first day, Sourav called me to get a sense of how the spinners—Bhajji, Rahul Sanghvi and WD Balaji Rao—had done. I told him that even though Rahul had got a lot of wickets, Bhajji was bowling the best. He straightaway told me to not bowl Bhajji after that so as to not expose him to the Australians. Of the 160-plus overs the Aussies batted in that game, Bhajji bowled only 40. He was to bowl a lot more in the Test series that followed, a series in which he picked up 32 wickets and was one of the primary reasons for our dream come-from-behind triumph.

Conviction and courage were Sourav’s strengths as a captain. He wasn’t impressed by numbers. Once he identified that special something in a player, he backed him to a fault. Others might have performed better, but Sourav was gifted at sussing out the X factor, and his intuition seldom let him down. The way he stuck his neck out was commendable. Indian cricket owes a great deal to his vision and his second-to-none attitude for where it finds itself today. I was standing next to him on the Lord’s balcony when he whipped off his T-shirt after we won the NatWest final. At the time, I thought it wasn’t the right thing to do. Sourav has since regretted his reaction, but the more I have thought of it since that evening in 2002, the more convinced I am that he made the right statement. Andrew Flintoff had done something similar at the Wankhede Stadium earlier that year after England drew the ODI series in India 3–3. Sourav was basically telling the English that if they could do it in Mumbai, we could do it at Lord’s. And why not?

The message his shirt-waving intended to convey, to his team as much as to the world, was that we were second to none. That was something exciting for the team, and we all bought into his urgings at team meetings to go out and express ourselves instead of playing timid, fearful cricket.

Sourav was forever one of the boys, even when he was the captain. Sometimes leaders can become a little aloof and conversations come to a halt when the skipper walks into a crowded room. But Sourav’s arrival only added to the cacophony. He was inclusive. He sought suggestions from everyone and if he found merit in the ideas of even the newest member, he wasn’t afraid to implement them. The youngest member of the squad could pull his leg without any compunctions or fear of repercussions.

Like Viru, Sourav is also a vastly misunderstood person. Especially in Lancashire, where he had played county cricket before I went there in 2007, he was perceived as lazy and laidback; they said he didn’t work hard enough. I disagree. Sourav didn’t make a song and dance of it, but I have seen how hard he worked, on his fitness and his batting. No matter how gifted you are, history is proof that you can’t be successful if you don’t polish your gifts.

I have heard people call him arrogant, and that too is anything but true. Yes, he has a mind of his own, and he is not conservative. If an idea takes root in his mind, he will follow it through, with or without support. I’ve got to know Sourav extremely well over the last two decades, and he continues to surprise me with his goals, his lateral thinking, and his vision for Indian cricket.

Sourav loves having people around him; he grew up in a large house in a big joint family, which instilled in him several qualities that continue to stand him in good stead. You get used to the noise, you understand that there will be several viewpoints, you realise that you have to be accommodating and not expect things to always pan out the way you want them to. But you also know that if you are convinced about something, you must follow it through. Sourav was a batsman supreme, but in my book, he will always be a leader first.

