I SAT IN A QUIET ROOM looking at a shining floor in which I could inspect my teeth, waiting for the distinguished Dr Lawrence Einhorn in his consulting room in the Indiana University (IU) Simon Cancer Centre in America. It was the 24th of January 2012. From denials, doubts to decisions it had taken me a long time to begin my treatment.

With me were Mom and Dr Nitesh Rohatgi. Dr Nitesh was the first oncologist to see my test results. He was recommended to us by many as a skilled and compassionate doctor. Apparently it took him moments to identify the cancer as seminoma based on the biopsy results presented to him. I was in Munich at that time, shooting the ad for Puma, and before I even met him I spoke to him on the phone. His voice was friendly but firm when he broke the news. He told me that probably it was a rare germ cell tumour called mediastinal seminoma. It belonged to the group of testicular tumours, which formed 5 percent of all cancers. What I had was 0.1 percent of those kinds of tumours, so it was very rare. He said I had only one option to get better and that was chemotherapy and three options where to get treated, India, London and the USA. ‘For now, since you are in Munich, Yuvi, go to London and meet Dr Peter Harper there,’ Dr Nitesh said.

I cleared my throat and said that I thought what I needed right now was the familiarity of home. I would come back and we could all get together and decide what to do. I did not immediately realize that Dr Nitesh was not asking me what the future course of action should be. He was telling me what to do. 

You would have gathered by now that I don’t take orders well. Imagine my surprise when he continued without any hesitation to tell me that he had spoken to Dr Harper, who was a very good oncologist. He had worked with Dr Harper  for many years in London before he returned to India to practice in Delhi. Dr Harper had a clinic in Harley Street and he was expecting me for my appointment tomorrow and things would move ahead from there.

No ‘Do you mind?’ or even a ‘please’? I cleared my throat again to protest butDr Nitesh sweetly said, ‘Not to worry, Yuvi, your mother will be on her way for your treatment soon. Everything is being taken care of. Everyone is working on tying up your pending issues.’

What was going on?

I was feeling mildly irritated but I obeyed. I flew to London the next day. When I got there I called up my two closest friends in the city, Babar and Naeem Amin, aka ‘Tintin’. I told them that there was some doctor business to be taken care of and I did not feel like going. They are used to my instinctive and sometimes stubborn dislike of discomfort. As friends they are also used to coaxing me when I get moody. Tintin and Babar encouraged me to go and see Dr Harper. I was here in London after all. Wouldn’t it just be logical to go? 

If I had seen Dr Harper in civvies near a cricket field, I would have thought he was one of those county cricket umpires you instantly get along with. He had a round face, round glasses and talked gently but was clearly a man in charge. In cricket he would have been the kind of umpire who doesn’t have to be dictatorial or head-masterish to keep a match under control.

At the clinic in Harley Street Dr Harper put me through an X-ray and a few blood tests. He went through my papers, which had arrived by email. Then he looked up and for the first time, face to face, someone said to me that I had cancer. This was a seminoma, he confirmed. The good news was that it could be treated. But not with surgery. The lump was sitting on the pulmonary artery, which carries blood from the heart to the lungs. To try to remove the tumour through surgery from where it was located would be dangerous. The lump could not be carved out and removed from my body, it had to be melted away. As Dr Harper casually mentioned ‘chemotherapy’ my insides froze and my mind went numb.

Dr Harper was doing his best to keep me assured. He took me on a short tour around the clinic. We went to the basement to see the chemo stations. I would need four cycles of chemotherapy, he said, if things went ok. In the basement, I noticed there was no sunlight coming into the room. I saw a child leaving his chemo station, stumbling out, walking slowly. It was clean and organized but for a moment I thought I was going to throw up in shock. I could hear Dr Harper trying to reassure me—after four cycles my life would be normal. It would be bad for two to three months, but I would recover after that. I would lose my hair, but it would grow back.

No matter what Dr Harper said, I didn’t feel reassured in any way. I wanted to run out of the clinic, hail a cab to Heathrow and jump on to the next plane to India. Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore, any place would do. 

We mumbled our thanks to Dr Harper and left the clinic. Until that point Tintin had no idea of any of this and these words, ‘cancer’, ‘chemo’, ‘seminoma’, tripped him completely. When we came out of the clinic, he was so disoriented that for a long time we hunted for his car in the car park because he couldn’t remember where he had left it.

That night the last thing I wanted was to be alone in a hotel room, so I crashed at Babar’s house.


When I spoke to people at home, I tried again to push them to bring me back to India. But my mother and Dr Nitesh were firm. They felt London was the best place for me for now. Dr Nitesh knew Dr Harper very well, and I had good friends in the city.

‘After years of visiting London regularly, I was quite familiar with the city, and comfortable too. That was the only positive thought I had in my mind as I lay awake in the dark that night, confused, feeling that every time I closed my eyes a black pit was growing bigger and bigger in my stomach. A slim ray of hope had lingered in me privately till the meeting with Dr Harper. That too was gone now. There was a monster in my body, on my heart. I wondered whether I would beat the cancer or the cancer would beat me. Dr Harper had assured me that I would be normal after chemotherapy. I played with the word in my head.

What was normal? Would I be 100 percent fit? What about cricket? Would I be fit for international cricket? Would I be fit for Test cricket? What if I couldn’t play anymore? Was that a normal life?

Over the next few days I was told the treatment with Dr Harper would begin once my mother reached London. We would rent an apartment close to the clinic and let the chemo begin. Then Mom called me and said the treatment was not going to happen in London. 

Mom had gone to meet my Gurujis in Hansali and Dupheda Sahib before leaving for London and Guruji in Hansali had told her that I should go to America. Well, in a sense. What he had said was, ‘When Yuvi comes back from America he will be all right.’

Looking back, I suppose it works out logically too. America is at the forefront  of cancer research and treatment. At that time, though, this last minute change of plans scrambled everything. Now we had to find new tickets, new visas, make new enquiries into American medical facilities, new doctors. I heard that they were looking into Sloan-Kettering in New York. Then, no, now they were looking into a big cancer hospital called MD Anderson in Houston.

What finally brought me to Indianapolis was the great man at the head of the IU Simon Cancer Centre. Dr Einhorn had treated more athletes suffering from cancer than anyone else and had a reputation for putting them back on the field. Most famously he had treated Lance Armstrong. While the other hospitals were bigger and located in big cities, Dr Einhorn at the smaller centre in the smaller, quieter city of Indianapolis was a specialist in testicular cancer. He was also the man who had discovered how platinum could be used in chemotherapy to improve survival chances from 5 percent to 95 percent for patients with testicular cancer. I remember Dr Harper’s words when I apologized to him for all the confusion and told him I was going to Indianapolis. He said the treatment that I would have got in London would have been identical as in Indianapolis. ‘But if it happened to my son, I would send him to Dr Einhorn.’ 

We had been sent. This is how I came to be in Indianapolis. In front of us sat a small, kind, gray-haired man in his late sixties, whose specs were cutely crooked on his face but who was dressed in what I thought was quite a funky coloured shirt. There was no sign of a white coat and no serious expression on his face.


Dr Nitesh had met Dr Einhorn the day before with my case papers. No more tests would be needed he told me. There was no doubt about what I was suffering from. Similarly, there was no doubt on the treatment. Chemo. He had spoken to Dr Nitesh about the game of cricket and its rigours, so he could know how to design the chemo course for me to ensure minimum damage to my life as an athlete. I would be able to handle the chemotherapy he said and smiled. ‘It is going to be difficult. But you will need to remember you are going to get better.’ Everyone around me would have to be strong for me. My mother, my family, my friends.

Next, he explained the course of the treatment, what are called the cycles of chemotherapy. My cycles would work in 21-day periods. Days 1-5, on each day three drugs would be injected into my system. Days 6 and 7, I would get a break. On day 8 I would return to the hospital for a single injection of drugs. Then days 9-14 would be a gap. On day 15 another single injection of a drug followed by another 6 days’ gap. End of cycle.

In these gaps the body would deal with the after-effects of the cycle and brace  for the next round. I would have to undergo three cycles. I made a mental calculation: 15 days plus 6 is 21. Three cycles would be 63 days. No; minus six days at the end because the last cycle would simply end on day 15. There was no gap after that. No six days between the end of chemo and the beginning of life. 

Fifty-seven days it would be. Almost two months starting tomorrow. Fiftyseven days, I thought. Like a busy tour. Maybe even like a rare break between two series. Fifty-seven days. A little longer than a World Cup. Who remembers fifty-seven days in a year?

‘After three cycles,’ Dr Einhorn said, ‘you could walk out of here like a man who never had cancer.’ I never forgot those words. In the storm that came afterwards I often felt that his words were the lifejacket that kept me from 
sinking into the ocean that was roaring around my head.

Our questions rushed out. About side effects first. The most visible side effect would be hair loss. It would definitely happen. There was also the possibility that for a short period of time I would not be able to hear certain tones, like a young child or a woman speaking to me—my hearing would become affected but it would recover eventually. When he said this, I could not help grinning. ‘Doc, that’s great. I won’t be able to hear women screaming at me? What could be better?’ Dr Einhorn laughed.

Dr Einhorn is a brilliant man, who has saved thousands of lives and yet he remains full of empathy and humility. I noticed it right away and over the weeks I would experience it again and again. If anyone asked him why he was doing what he was doing, why a certain treatment, the answer was never ‘because I say so’. There was always a clear, patient explanation from him. He had genuine respect and admiration for the strength to be found in all human beings. 

So I asked Dr Einhorn something about the long-term prospects of the treatment that I was really keen to know. After chemotherapy could I ever father a child? I did want to be married sometime in the future and I wanted to havechildren and I wanted to see them grow up.

He looked me straight in the face. Fertility was affected by chemotherapy, often temporarily, sometimes permanently. Earlier there used to be a 60 percent chance of being able to have children after chemo but more recently, because ofadvances in medicine, the chances had increased to close to 90 percent in some cases.

In the months after my first scan I had gone back to reading Armstrong’s It’s  Not About the Bike. In a way, it had come back to me. When I first picked it up years ago, I found it too depressing and mostly about medicines. However, in the past year I had re-read it entirely and in the book Armstrong had written about banking his sperm and fathering three children after his recovery. 

Could I do the same? Again, Dr Einhorn spelt it out neatly. A good thought, a forward-looking thought, but too late. The procedure to bank sperm would take too long. There were many formalities and a lot of paperwork. ‘We don’t want to wait anymore, Yuvi. It’s important we start your chemo tomorrow.’

It was the first time I had an indication that my cancer was at a stage where every day was valuable. Many months later, when the treatment was over and I had returned to India and was on my way to regaining a spot in the India team, I found out what stage the doctors thought I was in that day in Indianapolis. If there was no chemotherapy and the platinum drug that I received did not exist, Dr Einhorn said I was down to three to six months. Since it did, Dr Nitesh said, ‘many weeks to a few weeks.’ He added, ‘Weeks are months but months are not years.’

The IU Simon Cancer Centre chemotherapy station didn’t look like a hospital to me. There was natural light inside the building and greenery outside on the campus of the Indiana University. I saw patients walking around going to get some coffee, chatting to other people and I thought, this is not bad, this can be done. I had no idea how tough it was going to be.

Before the chemotherapy began, I had to sign a form that said I understood and accepted its consequences. It is called ‘informed consent’. It fell to Nurse Jackie Brames to read out the form to me. She stood next to me and started speaking. The drugs could impact fertility. The drugs could cause liver damage. The drugs could cause kidney damage. All there was to read on the paper was damage, damage, damage. Jackie always found reading out that form difficult. Halfway through, she said, ‘I can’t read any more. You just sign it.’ I said, ‘Jackie, are you giving me confidence here or what?’ She laughed. Her face beamed. I told her, ‘Whenever you see me, meet me with a smile on your face. I don’t want to see you brooding.’ I signed the form and went out of the centre with Mom and Dr Nitesh.

Soon it would be time to begin.

Before I go on, because I know you may want to turn the pages or run away, I must say this right at the start. Here’s the thing about chemotherapy: it comes very close to being the worst thing to happen, as it is the most severe treatment to deal with cancers, tumours, malignancy, but it is not the worst thing that can happen to you. The worst is to live half a life with the illness. Chemotherapy may feel like death but it is the only way through to life again for many people when they have cancer.

It begins simply. You sign the forms and go home. At night you psyche yourself up for the most important fight of your life. The next day you reach the hospital and you sit in a chair or lie down and you get hooked up to a drip. In the beginning there’s an hour of sitting around getting saline into the system for proper hydration. Then come the drugs. Into the body, drop by drop by drop. They have complicated names like Ifosfamide, cisplatin, bleomycin, etoposide. They are clubbed together under abbreviations like BEP and VIP.

The first time I watched the liquid drop down the tube and into my arm I wondered what would happen when it finally did its business. I took about two days to find out. On day 1, I was just sitting around waiting for the three drugs to go in. It took five hours. On day 2, I felt my face swell. On day 3, I was back in the hotel watching TV when I suddenly felt a horror catch hold of my throat. I can’t describe it. It was a feeling in the throat that plunged me into terrifying gloom and filled my mouth, the back of my eyes, my mind, with the sensation that only bad things would happen from now on. Cancer, chemo, the hospital, the hotel, Indianapolis, everything closed in on me and there was no mental place to escape to. I was filled with the sensation that I could not manage this. I was groping for other thoughts, good thoughts, but none came. As if there never had been any good times before, ever. I felt my face crumble, and before I could stop it, I felt hot tears of immense sadness burn my cheeks. I was crying. My mother came rushing to ask what had happened and the only answer seemed to be that the drugs had begun to kick in.

As the first cycle began to press down on my mind and body, I began to understand the scale of the chemotherapy and its terrifying power. I was told about its power over cancer, but I had not expected its force over the human body and mind.

As my chemo progressed, it started taking away my appetite and my sleep. Suddenly I didn’t want to eat anymore. Or I wanted to eat till I saw the food and then no more. With every passing day, I got used to the chemo station, began to recognize the doctors and nurses and my fellow patients. Patients went about their days trying to look as normal as they could. Some even returned to work after taking their dose. There were patients whose chemo sessions had become a part of their daily lives. There was a patient who had been on chemo for the last six years. When I spoke to her I realized that there were people here battling it out day in and day out.

There was a bronze bell in the chemo room. It was rung by a patient when he or she was leaving after finishing the treatment. To the person who rang it, it must have meant such joy and relief. To me it was a reminder that I would still have to stay.

I took three drugs on day 1, then two of the same drugs on days 2, 3, 4 and 5; then the first drug again on days 8 and 15—three drugs in all. But including my supportive medicine I took fifteen to seventeen drugs in all. At the chemo station I sat around watching movies on my iPad and surfing YouTube videos of my cricket. Outside the day would come to an end and the university campus would turn dark by 4 p.m. 

One day the nursing staff watched me checking out YouTube videos and became curious. One of the nurses was a sporty young girl called Elizabeth, who chatted with me about sports in India and asked what was my ‘line of work’. Once they discovered I was a professional sportsman, they wanted to know in what game. I tried to explain cricket to them. A hard job in America. They wanted to see it on YouTube so I pulled up my six sixes. It was the simplest way to explain I thought. I saw myself young, healthy, confident, sending the ball and poor Stuart Broad’s mood out over the Kingsmead boundary, into the inky blue Durban sky, and I found myself torn. Between joy and pride and a sense of total loss. Elizabeth’s reaction: ‘Wow, man, that’s six home runs!’

Mom would talk to me a lot those first few days. It was just the two of us far away from everyone else, trying to keep our spirits up. During one of my early days of chemo, I fainted. Mom is strong as hell but she is smaller than me and panicked that day. She dragged my limp body to a chair and called India frantically. That was when Nishant decided that his cousin Ritesh who lived in Canada would have to come down to help us move out of the hotel and into the apartment that he had found for us in the Cosmopolitan on the Canal. Ritesh drove from Toronto with a car full of Indian groceries and Indian household goods, non-stop for nine hours, though he had barely got back from India himself. When he reached Indianapolis we went out and bought a new Xbox for me. Then with all this stuff we moved into the apartment in the first gap of the first chemo cycle.

By day 13 I was exhausted. The chemo shot they had given on day 8 had made my body hurt real bad, especially my bones. But on day 14, one day before I went back to the hospital for the day 15 shot, I felt slightly better. I know this because I had started to keep a video diary. In London I had picked up a Handycam. I have always had a great memory and I remember every score of every match and what happened where and how and when. Like I remember when I met Sachin for the first time in my life, what I was doing and what he was doing and what he said to me. (We will come to that later, hang on.) I remember things from the past as if they are in a film I am watching. So when Dr Harper confirmed that the treatment would involve chemo, I went out and found a shop in London and bought myself a Handycam because I knew the chemo might mess up my brain. This was going to be the most important period of my life and I had a gut feeling that I would not be able to recollect it properly because of the drugs, and of course there would be no YouTube videos of it. I thought that later, maybe much later, I might want to look back on those days. So whenever I could raise myself, when Mom had gone shopping and I was alone in the apartment, I would set up the camera on the dining table and tape my thoughts. I did not know how quickly my will to keep this video diary would collapse, as would my will to keep up the gymming or my will to go cycling. Then when my friends came to Indianapolis to fill up my time and the house, which sometimes made me happy and sometimes made me angry, depending on what the drugs did to my mood, the camera became a toy for everyone to play with. We would film the ducks on the canal as we fed them; or a guy in a kayak paddling down on a freezing windy day two days after the surface ice had melted —wearing shorts! In my darkest days the camera became a way to have a little bit of fun.

It was around this time that the news about my cancer broke in India. As usual the Indian media went into a frenzy. Luckily for me, I was far away from it but sometimes Mom would get off the phone with Nishant or someone else and if I was looking up and about she might give me an update about what new theory was going around. In that state I couldn’t care less and I didn’t really want to find out who knew or did not know my condition. The people who needed to know, personal friends, professional friends, they knew. The media, though, would not let it go. I understood that mainly there was speculation that I had lung cancer. Then one day I got to know that two guys who I thought were my friends had helped themselves to some publicity on the back of my cancer. One was an Indian journalist whose name I don’t wish to take because it’s just the kind of publicity he would like to feed on, who used my BlackBerry updates to deliver this bit of breaking news on television as an exclusive scoop. Among the many roles he performed, this man was also some kind of an extension of the Pune Warriors management, which was now the IPL team I played for. As we needed to stay in touch, I had shared my BBM pin with him. He used my BlackBerry Messenger status to update the entire country that I was so weak I couldn’t even type, and that I had cancer. The second was Mr Jatin Chaudhry. He went on a news channel and talked his face off on it. Whatever came to his mind: about my condition and about what his treatment methods could do for cancer patients. 

Now that confirmation had arrived from sources perceived to be close to me the Indian media erupted. I was so grateful that I was away at that time or I would have been absolutely miserable. Sitting in cold Indianapolis I saw this as more evidence of what the world had come to. Publicity-hungry people who were in a race to show off who knew more. People piggyback on you when times are good but they don’t let go even when you have cancer. Amazing.

To scotch the rumours of lung cancer and to set the record straight, Nishant hurriedly organized for Dr Nitesh to address the press. He gave three hours’ notice and fifty media outlets turned up. After the story played, there was a flood of love from around the world. Cards, messages on Twitter, from little kids, from famous actors, from ministers, from fans and well-wishers, messages of love and more love and support. I was touched. I decided from now on I would address the world directly through Twitter.

The Super Bowl final was played out in the Lucas Oil Stadium, Indianapolis on the 5th of February. You cannot keep a sportsman away from sports for too long and this was too tempting to resist. The final had never been held in Indianapolis before, and this quiet, serious town went berserk.

I was so excited that I wanted to tell everyone I was going to the Super Bowl, the biggest, noisiest, richest sports event in the US and maybe in the world. But I didn’t share this outing on Twitter. Dr Nitesh’s press conference was the next day. On Super Bowl Sunday I was not sure whether I was ready as yet to talk to the world about where I was. Anyway, I couldn’t do it then, but I can do it now. Let me tell you, the Americans are at another level with these things. Madonna performed on stage and off stage. I read somewhere that thirty-second ad spots for the Super Bowl had crossed the $1 million mark years ago. After the press conference I decided I would come out on Twitter in a big way to share my feelings, my struggle and anyone who cared for me would have the news from me first hand. If anyone was going through cancer themselves and wanted to reach out to me, I would be there and we could share our experiences. Since then I have been sharing my feelings, moments and moods on Twitter.

As a cricketer, you are bound to feel physical pain. Getting hit by the ball as a batsman is painful, tearing the webbing of your hands as a fielder is extremely painful, the shock of colliding with a teammate going for the same catch is shock first and then pain. During a tournament, our bodies get sore as expected. Getting over the soreness is also more or less as expected. X-ray, pills, steroid shots, magic spray, massage, heat pads, cooling pads, ultrasound treatment, interferential therapy. There are physios, doctors, trainers, coaches, teammates to get you through it. This is familiar turf for a cricketer. 

Chemotherapy introduced me to unknown, scary shades of pain. I remembered what Kapil Dev had said to us in the dressing room once when he came to speak to us. He said that there is an old adage which is annoying to hear in good times and wonderful to hear in bad times and it is: ‘This too shall pass.’ 

But somehow time stood still for me. The hospital was next to the apartment which was fine, but every day I would sit, just sit, and find it really boring. Just a few months back my life had been so eventful. I wasn’t used to sitting and doing nothing. I couldn’t hit the gym much anymore, my body would hurt a lot. I worried about my hair which was going to start falling next week. I played video games, Gears of War was my favourite but other than that, and surfing the web, there was nothing more to do. Mom would go out to buy groceries, which she would come home and cook for me. She catered to whatever I wanted. If I couldn’t change my socks, she bent to the floor and changed them for me. I felt two years old again. If she looked across the room and saw tears in my eyes, she quickly came over and softly stroked my head and patted my back. At 10.30 in the morning or 2 in the night, if I wanted something she ensured I had it. She used to wake up much before me to ensure my stuff was in place: my ginger honey syrup to improve the taste in my mouth, my breakfast options from bread rolls to paranthas to French toast. All the prep done she would wait for me, wondering what I would ask for when I woke up.

After my shot on day 15, I woke up in the morning to find my bed was covered in hair. All night long my hair had been hurting me like crazy. In the morning I called my mother to show her the bed. Her comment was, ‘It is like two bears have been fighting in here.’

I decided to take matters into my own hand and just be done with it. On day 16 I positioned myself over my bathroom sink and to running commentary from Bunny, who was the first of our friends to arrive in Indianapolis, saying, ‘Ladies and gentlemen, presenting our very own Yuvi Brynner,’ I put the electric razor to my head. We quickly realized this was going to take some time because even with substantial hair loss my hair was really thick and wavy. Bunny suggested we go to a barber. Barber? How absurd. A bloke goes to a barber to get his hair styled, not to go bald! Because Mom and Bunny were there with me I was entertained throughout.

I realized the sink would get clogged in no time and picked up the dustbin and started razing into it. My hair was so soft, it burned as I clipped. If I just raked my fingers through my hair, dozens of strands would fall out in my hand. Despite the burning sensation I carried on. At various stages I looked like a punk, a Brahmin, and finally I would like to think Vin Diesel.

After the deed was done, I put on my yellow Oakleys and took a profile shot of my bald head. And I shared it on Twitter. Handsome is as handsome does!

A few weeks later I was sitting out on the landing outside our apartment door, watching the joggers and the walkers and the ducks and all the people going about their lives on the freezing banks of the canal when two young black guys passed by, did a double take and came back. They looked at me and said, ‘You know what? You look like a banana!’ and hooting they ran off. I looked down at myself. Yellow track top, yellow bottoms, a yellow siropa on my head, yellow Oakleys on my face. I fled indoors.

Sometime in mid-February Nishant had arrived with the siropa, a length of cloth not the full length of a Sikh turban but enough for wrapping around one’s head. My Guruji of Dupheda Sahib, Sant Baba Ram Singhji, had sent it as a blessing. With chemo the sensitivity of my scalp only grew worse. I would struggle to keep my hands from scratching my head. I realize now that this is why cancer patients cover their heads. Not just because they feel shy to be bald but also because it gives comfort to the scalp.

Pain can be a confidence killer. My pain ate into me. It came from unexpected places, not merely body ache but nausea, vomiting, shivering, headaches, the inability to smell anything, the absence of taste. My hands weren’t my hands anymore. They became the hands of an eight-foot giant in a fairy tale. The body I knew was gone. The hair from my body had fallen off. My mind was in pieces and it had still to deal with what was left of my body.

If the pain in the body was hard to deal with, the mental agony was as tough. The nausea and vomiting ruined my relationship with food. The chemo was eroding the person I was: more than a cricketer, a fun-loving foodie, who loved talking to people, not just to beautiful women, which I certainly did, but everyone: going to parties, listening to music, watching movies, dancing, being the prankster of the party. Instead I met my new self: Yuvi, the shell. This person who didn’t want to talk, whose world only looked inward, who found it awkward to start a conversation with a woman.

My bedroom upstairs was meant to be my private resting place. It is where I could cry without Mom rushing over to console me. As the chemo progressed it became the place where my limitations became most stark. I could not reach the bathroom in two easy strides. Instead I had to take stumbling, slow steps. I couldn’t get downstairs to the living room to greet every new day. Everything had become slower and difficult to do.

I have never been the philosophical, introspective type but in Indianapolis I thought hard and long about how my life had turned out. I had been a part of the team that had won the World Cup so that had gone well. But that was the past. The team was on the other side of the world in Australia, things weren’t going well and it made me mad that I couldn’t be around them. Sitting in my room I often wondered how people went through chemo sessions for years at a time. How did they fight the cancer that wouldn’t go away? How did those in India without resources possibly manage an illness like this?

I thought about many things. What it would have been like to have a partner, a companion—call her a girlfriend or a wife—to share what I was going through. Then I thought what the hell. I have my friends and even at my most reclusive time in life, I had made a whole lot of new ones.

There was Kiran Aunty. She had moved to America from Gurgaon nearly forty years ago and we met her at the Walmart near the house while hunting around for a Subway. She offered to help my mom with household work and she would bring me things I wanted to eat, like kheer and khichdi. She would tell me that she told people that Yuvi is not like the media paints him to be. That always made me laugh.

One day, trying to find an Indian grocery store, Mom and I bumped into Basil, who had looked out of the restaurant where he worked as a chef and recognized me. Basil started coming over to make me the best dosas I ever had. I couldn’t always taste the food but I could taste the love.

The manager of the Marriott, where we stayed when we first arrived, not only turned out to be from Chennai but was our neighbour at the Cosmopolitan. Every time I needed to be taken around in a car, Kumar Anne would make his car available.

Paroon Chadha, a friend of Dr Nitesh based in Indiana, quietly started keeping an eye on us. Paroon was like a typical NRI fan, who would travel the world to watch cricket and then would be harshly critical of our performances. But something clicked between us instantly and we became very good friends. He was our Man Friday in Indianapolis.

I did make new friends but I missed my old mates too. I longed to see them. I was really lucky that my wish came true; one by one they started dropping in soon. Rajeev Suri from Chandigarh said he heard my voice on the phone sounding low and depressed and flew all the way because he couldn’t bear it. Mr Suri has a grocery store in Sector 9 in Chandigarh. It was to his shop that I used to go as a kid to drink milk and sometimes to get myself a chocolate. Nishant and Sandy-pa had practically moved to Indianapolis. While I lay flat and finished on the drawing room sofa all day as Mom cooked, washed clothes, consoled me, hosted our friends, or tried to think of new ways to make me feel better, Nishant and Sandy-pa would try to keep me engaged and cheerful.

By the middle of the second cycle there were more bad days than good. Every morning I struggled to motivate myself to get into new clothes. My bones were killing me. I felt impatient with the chemo, irritated. There were days I refused to get out of bed to go to the hospital. Once Mom indulged me and called up IU Simon Cancer Centre to ask if I could get a break. They said they could delay the dosage by one hour but there was no question of interrupting the cycle. Mom came back to me and said, ‘Yuvi, we have to go.’ She pulled me out of bed and watched me as I got up to go to the loo—for days I had not been able to hold down even a sip of water—and then as I fainted and started falling to the floor she ran for me, so I fell straight on to her.

There were days during the second cycle that I wanted to walk from my chemo station to the taxi but had no legs. Inside them there was no bone, no muscle. My legs felt like empty bags of tired skin. I fought the wheelchair. I would tell everyone I’ll walk. A few steps and my knees would begin to fold and I would have to sit down in a corner. In my mind I would consider crawling on all fours to the centre’s front door. When I couldn’t get up someone would go fetch a wheelchair and, as we went through the corridor, I would feel as if everyone’s eyes were on me and they were thinking: who is this young man who needs a wheelchair? The judgement however is only going on in your head. When you have cancer, you just have it. You are not old or young, you are simply a cancer patient. You collapse, you puke, you get angry, you cry, you bombard your caregiver with requests for this dish or that, and the moment it is produced turn away from it, you throw up the dish so carefully prepared seconds after eating a tenth of it.Then as you lie in bed at night, your face burns with shame. What must they be thinking of me? Why am I behaving like this? How can I do this to the people that love me? The tears come flowing out and soak your pillow. During such moments all you can hope for is that ‘this too shall pass’.

You promise yourself that when you are on the other side you will make it up to everyone. But when you come to the other side you realize no one expects anything in return. What you did for everyone who loved you was do the chemo.

About ten times a day, Mom, Nishant and Sandy would say, ‘Let’s go for a walk.’ Most times it was after I’d eaten. Their plan would be to uplift my mood, and get me some ‘fresh air’ to bring me out of my shell. The clean sharp bite of the Indianapolis oxygen was always a nice shock to my system and often it kept my post-food nausea under control. But they weren’t very successful. Their strike rate must have been once in ten tries. The outdoors was both my friend and enemy. The scenery was pretty but I started hating the silence of the winter and walking along the canal with a barf bag in my hand. Always there was Nishant or Sandy or Mom for company but my thoughts were my own and they walked beside me quietly.

Once I sent them outdoors for a change. I wanted to spare them the agony of seeing me throw up again. With every meal I would throw up, the thought of how bad my mom and friends must feel burned at the back of my mind.

The Indianapolis days remained short, and the night closed in early. On the street from the window I would occasionally see a jogger run by. I started missing the chattering crows, the cycle bells, the honking of traffic, the call of namaaz, the putt-putt of scooters, the sounds of India. Mumbai’s night is a song of the sea putting you to sleep. From another apartment somewhere you can hear laughter or you will hear loud voices from the road. Under the tree outside my house in Mani Majra, the man who irons the entire neighbourhood’s clothes has his radio on throughout the day, playing old Hindi film songs.

As I sat at the dining table with my head in my hands, or stood at the window watching the canal, I felt pangs for India, for my life in India that I had been missing. Hundreds of boys would be going off to cricket practice and the boys I knew particularly well would be heading out into the field in Australia, encouraging each other, that today, this session, we can perform better.

The world was moving along fast but my life had come to a standstill. I was in an island of silence, no longer a part of the team I had once belonged to. Indian cricket had moved on and I had been left behind. Then one day Anil bhai turned up.

Nishant had told me Anil Kumble was in Boston and he had asked if he could come to visit and spend the night. I didn’t think it would happen, but I should have known better. When Anil bhai gives his word, he really means it. Just so you know, I’m like a schoolboy in his presence. To us younger ones Anil Kumble was like a headmaster. When I first played for India, he was the most senior bowler on the team. Mohammad Kaif and I were two frightened guards at point and cover in that first series. If he was bowling and the ball went past us, we knew we were going to get his special full-volume bollocking. As scared as we were on the field, off the field we found he was the nicest guy, low-volume speaker, no unnecessary baggage. Oddly, it was this side which came as a shock to us, because on the field his ‘Howzzat?’ could blow apart a stump mike. When we misfielded, that was the decibel level at which we got it. No umpire had a chance of stepping in.

When I saw Anil bhai in our living room, I actually thought at first that he was going to lecture me, give me a nice dose of ol’ Anil bhai wisdom. Instead, he settled into the sofa, unrattled by the huge shelf stockpiled with medicines on the opposite wall, and chatted about his work at the Karnataka State Cricket Association and what was going on at the NCA and in Indian cricket generally. When he suggested we take a walk, I was out of the door before anyone else. Even my stomach behaved itself. Anil bhai was majestic, his presence calming, and of course the next day he laid down the law.

He said, ‘Stop watching YouTube videos of your matches. Cricket will come back one day, concentrate on your health, focus on your recovery.’ There was a time a shoulder surgery had kept him out of cricket for a year. He spoke about that time when he was operated in South Africa. At times he was alone in an apartment near the hospital. At times he could not lift a thing with one hand. He put every ounce of his energy and every second of his attention simply into getting better. Not into playing for India again, taking wickets, but getting his shoulder stronger. This is what I would have to do with my body. It was great advice at the right time because the truth was my mom and friends could not stop me from watching those videos even though they only made me sad, reminding me of what was not there. Here was cancer, my opponent at this time and I had to fight it first. How was it like fighting cancer?

Well, honestly it was like facing the toughest bowling of my life in the worst possible conditions. Losing the fight, giving up my wicket, was entirely up to me. I decided I could not and I would not succumb to it. I would put up a fight. I would try not to keep myself in this shell, shutting off people, torturing myself about something I could not have. I would make an effort to be outgoing again.

During the second cycle the apartment security passed on a gift that was left for me by some Indian students of the University of Indiana. They had found out that I was being treated for my cancer in their town. They made me a giant card. A lot of kids took the trouble to mention that they were not cricket fans. Very bad! When Nishant got in touch with the student association to thank them, they said they wanted to meet me for a few minutes and all they wanted to say to me in person was that I was going to get well soon.

If I was still in the state I was in before Anil bhai came—shy, unsure—I  would have just said no to meeting strangers, going through the drill of shaking hands and smiling for photographs. Now, the idea of meeting with young Indians appealed to me. Indian youngsters have such great optimism and energy. Then, on the promised day, I didn’t wake up in great health. I was in the days 9-14 gap of the second cycle. I was puking all morning. It was tough to stand for a few minutes. I looked out of the window and saw that it was probably the worst day of the winter. The wind howled outside. Even the few Americans who were out and about, for a change, looked like they might be feeling cold. (So far I was convinced that they were made of ice. No matter how cold it was someone would pass by the window in shorts!) Today everyone had turned up their jacket collars, covered their heads with caps, and their ears with muffs. It was sub-zero temperatures outside. I put on layer upon layer of warm clothes. I didn’t want to disappoint the gathering, who were dealing with intense cold weather and shivering in the blasting winds.

It turned out to be the right decision. When I stepped out there were at least one hundred and fifty kids there. When they saw me, they let out a huge cheer. People started whistling, catcalling and then they started chanting my name.

At first I was taken aback. I could not believe it. They were students, probably much younger than me, and here they were standing with arms full of flowers, gifts, cards. Many of them had packed boxes of Indian food: biryani, rajma, aloo-gobhi, chicken curry, dal. They must have realized I was homesick for India, that Indian food would make me feel happy. After a little hesitation, they started talking all together. Some called me, ‘sir’, many called me ‘Yuvi’, and no one called me ‘uncle’. Suddenly for a moment I felt as if I was in a cricket stadium somewhere in Jaipur or Rajkot. They made such a noise that the building security called us to figure out what was the matter. Residents had complained to them about the noise and thought there was a political rally happening.

There was a group from the cricket club in Bloomington, 90 km from Indianapolis, which was also there. Everyone took photos, Mr Suri filmed the scene and after a long time I felt happy, surrounded by faces that felt familiar, joking that I had forgotten how to sign autographs. The students had kept track of my chemotherapy cycles. One boy wished me best of luck for the lung function test and the CAT scan that I had to go in for before beginning cycle 3.

Ah, the third cycle. On the day before the last chemo cycle I went to the centre to get the tests. I said to myself that this was the time to be strongest and then I entered the hospital and threw up. We did the tests and left.

The next morning I reached the hospital prepared to roll up my sleeve and present my arm once again to a nurse, who would tap it repeatedly and hopefully find a vein without too many tries. But Dr Einhorn took me into his consulting room and said there would be no chemo that day. He said that the tumour was out, only scarring tissue was left, the cancer cells were dead. Scarring tissue was acceptable in patients of seminoma testes cancer. Looking at the results, he had decided to change the drug regimen for the last cycle to preserve my lung capacity. The third cycle would not be fifteen days. It would be just five days, straight through to the end, and for this cycle I would be hospitalized.

As I left Dr Einhorn’s room, I found I could suddenly laugh, sing songs, have a coffee! I was dying to walk along the canal, bask in the sun which had come out, tell everyone that I was GOOD, GOOD, GOOD, make a tape on the Handycam. I had expected the third cycle to be frightening. But that was tomorrow. What was five days as compared to two weeks?

I was in a good mood after a long time. Paroon Chadha used to light the fire under me with his boasts of, ‘Look, Yuvi, no matter how good you are at any other sport, you cannot beat me at ping-pong.’ I can’t bear people saying that they can beat me when we haven’t even had a fair game. So the best way was to play and find out. So that night before the third cycle, I was raring for some action. The nearest table tennis centre was forty-five minutes away. I made Paroon book a table and challenged him to a match. By the time we reached the playing centre, my nausea was getting worse. Paroon beat me in straight sets 3-0, with much chuckling. I didn’t have the energy to retrieve the ball and Sandy and Nishant were helping me as ball boys. All I could do was cover my end and hit it.

Sandy-pa said, ‘You will go away from here defeated? Chal, koi nahi … (Doesn’t matter, no big deal).’ The old instinct kicked in. Physically I was fading but I did not want to give up. We started a new match. After one set I was gasping for breath. All the guys began to worry. ‘Why are you taking this so seriously, Yuvi? Let’s go home,’ they said. I went to the washroom to throw up and listened to the voice inside my head that was getting louder and louder.

‘Fight, Yuvi,’ it said. ‘Fight. This is what you do. You know how to fight.’ Only when I had won the second match with a 3-0 scoreline did I agree to stop. What a long day it had been. What a long day tomorrow would be. But tonight? Tonight I would sleep properly.

Next morning came the double whammy. My chemo could not be started as my blood count was too low and an alert radiologist had spotted a blood clot in the lung.

Dr Nitesh had come to Indianapolis to see me into the start of my last cycle. Thank god he was there when I got this news. We came back home slightly disappointed. Mom was upset about this new problem. I could not understand it either. A clot? Would the clot travel to my brain? Had my luck gone bad? Had I done anything to cause this? He sat us down at the dining table and opened up a diary. And in the diary he drew charts and diagrams so that I could understand systematically that the problem was a problem only if I chose to look at it as a problem. He said, ‘What you see is what they are able to pick up. It seems like a lot of problems are there but that’s because you are at a good centre. It’s like this.

In a village, people can’t even tell its cancer. In the city, we can pick up on cancer because the diagnostic tools exist.’

‘This is a good centre so they can pick up the problems. Don’t see it as a problem, just think that you are lucky.’ I felt lucky to have him there.

There was an injection I was told I had to take every day to thin the blood and this injection I would have to give myself. I prepared myself for it. Dr Nitesh took me to my bedroom to show me how to do it. Pinch the skin of your belly, then go in as perpendicular as possible. In time I would call out to my friends, ‘Oye, Nishant, come and help me with this,’ and giggle as they turned pale and scooted as if I was coming to inject them. How far I had come. Remember those days when I was scared as hell of the needle? Life was teaching me the lesson well: no pain, no gain. Over the last few months my mom had taken almost every challenge in her stride. She never cried, never broke down or regretted. But this challenge that I used to set for her by asking her to inject me used to make her run. She could never watch me taking that injection.

In a fight resistance is better than surrender. During the past few months, there was a lot I had learnt, the hard way. I was forced to deal with things I hadn’t had to face before. Weakness, but to overcome weakness one could put one foot in front of the other and repeat the action; dizziness, one could hold onto something or someone; nausea, just let go and deal with it. Anger, an emotion which I detested in others—now the smallest of things made me angry: the colour red, people talking loudly or crowding into my space, people talking about the hospital or chemo, people giving me pity.

In the first cycle I was taking ‘Neulasta’ to boost WBCs, and it made my bones scream, the spasms made it impossible to move as the Neulasta injections expanded the bones. When the bones expanded, it would feel like my muscles were wrapped over knives. There would be fever and for two hours constant shivering. No pain-killer could make the pain go away.

I tried to cope by adding on tablets. Lack of sleep. Tablet. Appetite. Tablet. Ulcers of the mouth. Tablet. Need to build the immune system? Tablet. Feeling like death? Tablet. Can’t go to the toilet. Six tablets. Feeling low? There is definitely a tablet for it but I thought it was better to cry and let it out. While we waited for my body to be ready for the last cycle of chemo, we celebrated Dr Nitesh’s birthday in Indianapolis. I tried my best to rub some cake on his face. But the cake didn’t have enough cream. Never mind, doctor. Some other time. All these people, Nitesh, Nishant, Bunny, Sandy, who stayed with me, left their problems and their families behind to be with me and my problems. For them I was their family, and for me they were my allies. Relationships made in these times seldom change.

My final chemo started five days after it was originally scheduled. Bleo was omitted because it was believed to be causing me mild lung toxicity. Ifosphamide replaced Bleomycin. So far I was on BEP. It became VIP: Etoposide (also called VP16), Ifosphamide and Cisplatin.

If the first two cycles had given me ups and downs, the third cycle was like a boxing match, getting hit all the time, but holding on, trying not to fall down. For five days the chemo pounded me and when we got to the end and I saw that I won, I felt I had won without any gloves. 

During the cycle I had two gears: drowsy and asleep or drowsy and nauseous. Dr Nitesh tried to get me on to a jigsaw puzzle on day 1 but my hands had become fat paws. I tried to pick up those small flat pieces, and I couldn’t. To get movement in my legs, I tried to walk around with the IV drip. I walked so slowly I thought I shouldn’t. Around me there were friends all the time. More visitors from India, Manish Malhotra, Vivek Khushalani, and of course the core team: Mom, Ritesh, Dr Nitesh, Sandy-pa, Nishant, my friend Charan Shetty. My core group was good, I was lucky, but if I managed to open my eyes, I saw my pain in theirs.

On day 4, I got my spirits up for one last excellent prank on Paroon. It was a prank played to perfection and Paroon was almost in tears by the time we revealed our hand. Revenge! For all the critical things he said about my team! And then I collapsed and hardly again opened my eyes.

If you guys want the prank here it is. A very senior journalist from India rang Nishant and wanted to write a story on my condition. Nishant gave him the story but was reluctant to attribute quotes to himself in the story. But the senior journalist wanted someone to give quotes. I asked Nishant to attribute the quotes to Paroon. Later when the story was published I asked Dr Nitesh to call Paroon and tell him how dejected I was that he had given his quotes, that he too turned out to be one of those guys who make the most of a famous guy’s friendship. Paroon had no clue about how my story with his quotes had landed up in one of the leading dailies in India. He was sad and furious with the Indian media and equally bemused as to how they had attached his name to the story. The next day Nishant and Paroon were supposed to go to Austin to see how Livestrong worked. He was coming to the hospital to pick him up. I very strategically placed the Handycam in my hospital room to record Paroon’s long, stuttering clarification about how he was innocent. Nervous, sweating like a pig, and almost reduced to tears, defending his integrity and friendship, Paroon was too funny. Then he saw my mom laughing in the corner. Within minutes everyone who had one by one left the room because they couldn’t control themselves burst into the room rolling with laughter. Paroon couldn’t believe it and yet he insisted he had smelled a rat! Oh boy, that was a funny one. He was so relieved, he was wiping his face by the end. I called him my chemo bakra.

It was the last day of my chemo. I had now gone through three cycles and had been in Indianopolis for two months. As I lay on my hospital bed, the hours slowed down to a trickle. With my eyes closed to the room—its four walls, the bed I was on, the IV drip, the cabinets, the medicines—I tried to think of the view outside the apartment. The canal, the sky and the trees. The branches had become totally bare in the winter. Just before I came to the hospital I had noticed they had begun to sprout small light green leaves. As I slept with my head wrapped in my yellow siropa, in Hansali, Guruji got the severest outbreak of a rash like eczema. His skin cracked up into infected boils. No doctor could treat him successfully. We have this belief in India that when a guru blesses your journey through an illness he diverts some of the poison towards himself.

Six days after I had entered the hospital for the third cycle of chemo I left the IU Simon Cancer Centre leaning on Mom. That day I did not have the strength to say goodbye to Dr Einhorn or the nurses. I could not bring myself to ring the gong. But two days later I beat Charan Shetty in a game of pool. He had bet $100, and after I got it I didn’t let that note out of my sight.