IF I HAD A CHOICE, I may never have been a cricketer. I love sport of every kind, loved it as a kid, and love it now. I was naturally gifted at sport. Unlike studies, at which I was not so naturally gifted! The part of school I looked forward to was outside the classroom. I enjoyed recess and PT, beating the others at marbles and filling my pockets with them. Books and studies did not excite me. I hated sitting in class, and listening to lessons. I was restless, yearning to get out and play. 

Looking back now I realize that for some reason the school I was in, I was one of six boys in a class of thirty girls! It’s too bad I didn’t make the most of that tremendous advantage. To tell the truth there was only one girl in class who could tolerate my rowdy behaviour and we became friends in class four. Her name was Aanchal. Aanchal Kumar helped me with my studies and once, in a geography test, she let me copy her entire answer paper. How I managed to score 36 out of 50 and she 34, I will never know. 

Around class six, no matter how much Aanchal or anyone else helped me, my grades started dropping. From 80 percent I was down to 60 percent, from 60 to 40, then hovering dangerously around 37. My mom wanted me to be good in studies as well as in sport, and there followed a period where I changed schools frantically, trying to find the right one for me. 

In one such attempt, I was sent to board in Patiala’s famous Yadavindra Public School. I can see now why my father thought it was a good idea to send me there. The Patiala school of batting was much admired in Punjab those days.

Navjot Singh Sidhu was the latest in a long line of bold shot-makers from Punjab and Sidhu used to practise at the famous Maharani Club in Patiala. 

While I was there, Dad would come on weekends to visit me. One fine day, he took me to the Maharani Club and asked me to pad up. Sidhu would be at the club. Dad went around to him and asked him to watch me bat. I was not yet a teenager. I played a few shots, missed a few. After observing me for a couple of minutes, Sidhu turned to Dad and gave him his expert opinion: I was not made for cricket. I showed no promise.

As Dad took me back to the hostel that day, he muttered: ‘Apna basta utha aur ghar chal. Ab main dekhta hoon ki tu cricket kaise nahin khelta.’ (Pack your stuff, we are going home. I’ll see how you don’t play cricket.) With these words he sealed my fate.

I cannot describe clearly enough what uncontained joy I found as a kid playing my different sports. From speed-skating through hot breeze, under trees, over distances, when I felt I could grab freedom one outstretched arm at a time, to the thrill of racing down a field, football glued to my boots as I dodged past my opponents, laughter in my throat, teammates running alongside waiting for the ball to leave my feet and get stuck to theirs. 

I was always a prankster. I still am. My friends and I would turn up the volume of the television set at home just so that Mom would burst into the room to protest at the noise. We would make a run for it, leaping over the boundary wall that separated our house from the road. Running and running and running, far enough and fast enough to make our lungs burst and so far till I could not hear my mother’s protesting voice anymore.

The Chandigarh Sector 10 skating rink was always full of kids and from the age of four or five I was the fastest. When I was eleven, I could race in the under-14s and win. Then there was tennis, which I could play patiently even for an hour, waiting for the sweet music of the racket making flawless contact with the ball, for a perfect zzzng. The ball would skim the net, clip the line, and my opponent would go flailing. It would be one point but on the court I felt any moment could lead to a big one. I played to win.

Even as a child, I wanted my life to be full of big moments and mega events. I especially enjoyed playing tennis because on the court I could pretend to be like my hero Boris Becker. He had won Wimbledon at seventeen and he was someone I wanted to be. I loved his energy, I loved his shouting; he had passion for everything he did. I loved that.

Seeing that I was so keen, Dad bought me a tennis racket. It was for Rs 2,100. This was 1989 or thereabouts and that was a lot of money. It is a decent amount of money today, so think back to twenty years ago. One day soon after I got it I lost a match with that racket. I got furious. I threw the racket to the floor and smashed it. The moment the racket splintered, I knew I was in trouble. Maybe I had seen Boris do it, maybe another tennis player on TV. I thought this is what you do when you are angry and you want to argue with fate.

Back then, I had started thinking of my dad as ‘Sher’, Tiger. I knew Sher was going to give me the shouting of my life—if not a proper hiding, which I had received many times before—and that it would be the end of my tryst with tennis. That is exactly what happened and this is how I stopped playing tennis.

After my momentous meltdown I stuck to skating. I skated six days a week and on Sundays I went to play cricket. But the desire to go back to tennis lingered on. Because I had been ok at tennis, I could cajole my friends into lending me their rackets and wangle an occasional game with the under-12 and under-14 players. Partly it was love for the game, partly loyalty to Boris, partly rebellion, but I kept playing tennis secretly for the years that I could still manage to escape my father.

My first memory of cricket has nothing to do with my father and his role in my game. It has everything to do with where I grew up, what I was like, and what kind of mischief I got into. As I recount this, I am taking the opportunity to apologize to the man on the scooter who got hit on his helmet.

One evening, we were playing outside my father’s old house in Sector 11. On the other side of the boundary wall was a bare patch of land that we kids in the neighbourhood had turned into a cricket ground. As I took a big swing at the ball, it flew through the air, over the ground, and on to the road outside the field. Exactly at that moment a man appeared under it on his scooter. Poor guy, he must have been on his way on a normal day in the middle of a normal errand. As the ball hit him, he toppled over and the scooter went sliding under him along the road. It took him a while to realize what had just happened and rise to his feet. As soon as he did, he ran towards us, red-faced, hurt and really, really annoyed.

As for us we simply ran as fast as we could, throwing everything in our hands to the ground. We jumped over the wall, fled into the house and hid behind the curtains. We watched the guy from this safe distance. He finished dusting himself off, looked around, picked up my bat, restarted his scooter and rode off with it.

Now there was a history to that bat. My buddy Sohan Singh and I had each pooled in Rs 150 to buy it. With it we would rain down sixes, which would crash through windows in the neighborhood. It had become our weapon of mass destruction. We were so proud of owning it, we loved it.

Sir, if you are reading this book, I am saying sorry now, but can we please have the bat back? This is my earliest cricket memory. An earlier memory, which will tell you a little about the kid I was, is about the difficult business of learning to ride a bicycle. A few years before the incident with the man on the scooter, I pestered my mother to buy me a bicycle. I did not know how to ride a cycle but I wanted to own one desperately. Cycles were shiny and cool. Cycles took you places and I wanted to have one to go anywhere I pleased.

I stormed the heavens and raised hell to make sure I got that bike. Stubbornness must be genetic, I guess. When the bicycle was presented, I took it to the road outside our house and promptly set about finding the balance one needs to keep a cycle going. Kids have to be taught to ride bikes with parental attention, with helmets, trainer wheels, slowly, safely, but not me. I wanted to master the machine on my own, in a day. Off I went, on the main road, and while trying to balance the cycle, crashed into a rickshaw and fell. It was a spectacular accident, made up of a pinch of foolishness and plenty of blood. On the way to the hospital, my mother gave me an earful. We needed ten stitches to get two of my fingers working again. When I pull on my gloves now, I can still see the scars. The stitches remind me that balance is always a hard thing to master. Balance wasn’t part of the way I grew up and it is not part of Indian cricket either. Being accident-prone got me used to getting up and dusting myself off without fuss.

My childhood was full of running and falling and getting up like this. Once I fell near a fast-moving local train. I must have been about nine, maybe ten. I had been dispatched to Sonepat to take part in a brief shot in one of Dad’s Punjabi films. It was supposed to be simple: running through some fields to stop a friend from going away. I asked the female lead Preeti Sapru, a great friend of our family and my mom, whether it would be a good idea if while running I took a tumble.

She said why not! It would be all the more realistic, dramatic, filmi! I still remember the scene. I had to run fast, yelling ‘Roop, Roop,’ the name of the friend I was trying to stop. But as luck would have it, the script was very soon overtaken by incidents that happened within a few seconds of each other. Suddenly there was a real train passing at real speed and right then I stumbled and my head landed next to the train tracks. If I had not been pulled away in time there’s a good chance those future wisecracks about my swollen head would have been avoided.

When my father returned to the set and heard about the incident he went ballistic. For once he was not shouting at me but at the crew. How can you give a wild child the run of a place that has a train going through it!

So, this is what I was like. Well-meaning, all-consuming, fun-loving and prone to dive head first into trouble. Always seeking balance, I would run and fall, dust myself off and start over. It is not that my parents didn’t try to keep things sane. After this episode, my film career was brought to an abrupt end. It was back to school, with no more messing around. But before they pulled me out of my filmi career, I did two short roles as a child ‘star’, Mehndi Sajda Di and Putt Sardara.

Cricket is a beast. It demands the labour of building a fortress around a treasure and that treasure is timing. When Sidhu appraised me in Maharani Club, Patiala, I must have been un-coordinated and miserable. Being the kind of child I was, I would have played a lot of shots instinctively, but I did not know where my leg stump was. At thirteen I was thirteen, not Sachin Tendulkar at thirteen. Sachin Paaji is an exception.

After it didn’t work out in Patiala, Dad packed me up and we returned to Chandigarh. Once we were back, he made me his pet project. I didn’t realize it immediately but the hours I would give to sport began to change. Six days of skating and one day of cricket slowly turned into six days of cricket and a day of skating and soon, no skating. Cricket became a chore. It involved work, sweat, there was no fun, no feeling that it was play. For the first time I felt this was not a sport for enjoyment or the joy of having fun. It was more like proving a point, and I began approaching it with the dread that here was a task set for me by my dad that I had to complete.

Dad wanted me to be like him: a big, burly, fast bowling all-rounder. In the seventies and eighties, which was his time, fast bowling all-rounders were a rage around the world. Every team needed one, and the teams that found one prospered. Botham, Hadlee, Imran and Kapil, these guys were the glamour boys of cricket. But before this part of the project could take off, Dad’s dreams ran into a great man called Bishan Singh Bedi.

From 1993 Dad sent me to Bishan Paaji’s summer camp for children. The first one was a scorcher, everyone plodding away in the mind-bending heat of Delhi. The next year Paaji moved the camp to Chail, in Himachal Pradesh, God bless him.

I was sent to Bishan Paaji as a budding seamer. I was tall and strong for my age, so I tried to bowl medium pace and bat at no. 8. When he watched me bowl, he barked, ‘What are you doing?’ He knew right away that it was a bad idea. ‘You cannot be a seamer. Go bat.’ I don’t think he would have guessed that I would become a sly, slow, slow left-arm bowler (I dare not say spinner) ten years later.

Chail has the highest cricket ground in the world. It is on the top of a hill, at a height of 2,444 metres from sea level. In Bishan Paaji’s camp I scored the first century of my life. This is where I learned what it means to be on top of the world in cricket. I hit two sixes after crossing 100 and Paaji introduced a new rule at the camp. He said from now on a six would be out. Because, in Chail, if you cleared the ground, the ball—each of which cost around Rs 300—would sail into the valley and fall thousands of feet below.

Quickly, cricket became like a large, noisy member of my extended family. Once it came into my life, it would not leave. But even as a teenager, there were times I felt I was living my father’s life, chasing his dreams. I didn’t understand why I had to do it, but I knew I did.

I think my father lived with the deep, gnawing frustration that his international cricket career was unsuccessful. This is what must have bubbled up in him on the day Sidhu wrote me off. He poured his efforts into me, almost 24/7, and made it his mission to have me represent India.

We have seen this happen in so many sports with so many young athletes—in tennis, in golf, in swimming. The parent may deny the motive for the drive, but the child understands. My father wanted success in cricket so badly that it became the reason he chose to be harsh with me. When I was eleven years old I had won a gold medal in speed skating at the under-14 state tournament. That evening Sher was furious. He snatched the medal from me and said stop playing this girls’ game and threw the medal away. 

Returning to Chandigarh from Patiala after I was withdrawn from YPS, none of us could have seen it coming. All he had said was that he would follow the regimen of his own playing days. All I can say is that it was brutal. He uprooted the beautiful garden that Mom had planted behind our house, covered it with marble flooring and put in floodlights. From now on I had permission to see my friends for half an hour between school and practice only. If there was a school holiday, I would train in the morning with DAV College students. On some days he would wake me up and take me to the Sector 16 stadium, where first-class matches were held before the stadium was built in Mohali. From there it was back home and on to the gym. I could then take the half hour granted by him to be with my friends at the Sector 10 Tank, and have dinner. This was followed by more practice under lights for forty-five minutes before sleeping. The same routine was repeated the next morning.

He talked a lot about his time in cricket, about himself and Kapil Dev. He would say that his marble wicket was going to get me ready for international cricket and fast bowling.

So there I was, getting the hang of my game, wet tennis balls and hard plastic balls leaping off the cold hard turf, being bowled at my body. In the background I could hear my mother say, ‘You are going to kill my son’. Dad told her to stay out of it. He was obsessive about the short ball and so he would take me to the Sports Authority of India’s Pace Bowling Academy in the Sector 16 stadium and have me bat without a helmet.

Dad told the trainees at the centre to bounce me all the time. No helmet for me and a hard, leather cricket ball in their hands. Whatever fear I had of fast bowling or getting hit was leached out of me. Even now I know that the fear of getting hit can bother you as an international cricketer but if you are better prepared you can handle it.

During these years that Dad trained me, I may have become a tough nut and got used to being pinged around the ears, but I can’t deny that I was also reduced to anger, tears, and was often left boiling in my own frustration

One January my dad wanted me out of bed early in the morning. Chandigarh’s winter mornings at times don’t go above 1 degree C and I was dawdling because I didn’t want to get out of bed. It was a chilly day and I didn’t want to train. So I lay still in bed, and pretended I didn’t hear him when he said, ‘Better get up, Yuvi. I am warning you.’ I thought he wasn’t that serious and kept pretending to be warm, tucked up, cosy and asleep under my razaai. I heard him head towards the bathroom and thought he was gone.

He was not. He filled a bucket of freezing cold water, came back and emptied it over my bed. I don’t think that I will ever be able to thaw out of that shock, the wave of cold water hitting and soaking the bed. It was like being caught under a moving glacier. I leapt out of bed and ran into the bathroom shivering. It took ages for the hot water to emerge out of the shower. All that time, he stood outside the door telling me to get ready fast and go for a run.

Inside I was standing under the shower, begging the hot water to hit me quickly and conquer the shivering, the shaking. My teeth were rattling. In an open battle with the hot water and my father, I wished the worst on him. For the first time in my life, I cursed and hurled abuse at him. To prove he was the man in charge, he wanted me to go for a run right then. The mule in me, of course, didn’t want to listen to him anymore.

I left home and walked around in a rage, determined to get back at him by bluffing him that I had gone for a run. Except, after twenty minutes, I found him at my side on his bicycle, telling me to run, run. There was no escape.

Slowly, gradually it was getting into my head that if I could live with this, if I could sweat the bullets and swallow the bitter pills, cricket would take me a long way, to where my dad had dreamt of reaching. I just had to push myself hard enough. Even better, cricket could give me direction and freedom from a life beyond running and falling, running and falling. On days when I had scored some runs, prompting people to point me out as my father’s talented son, I came to accept that he may have been right. When my performances began to mean something in the middle, cricket began to mean something to me. I started scoring runs, at first in clutches of 20s and 30s and then proceeded to bigger scores. Fast bowling didn’t frighten me anymore. I could swat bouncers off my nose, helmetless, and stare the bowler in the face. Around that time I think I started to feel that I had what it took.

In this period I was a teenager, growing in size and ambition, my own dreams restling with my father’s, having thoughts like what is my place in this peculiar game, when things began to change at home. My parents had started fighting and arguing. They would start with small issues and my younger brother Zorawar, who was barely four years old, couldn’t understand what was going on. I understood that my parents weren’t getting along, the atmosphere in the house was getting ugly, but I could do nothing about it. Cricket became my escape route.

What cricket would do for me was take me out of the house and I chose not to miss a single game. I played wherever I could. At cricket practice, I would be in the company of my mates. We went to play in Patiala, Amritsar, Jalandhar, even as far as Delhi and Faridabad. If there was a match on a ground and I had been invited it didn’t matter that the place had no wicket, that it was being played on a field that had just been tilled. Let me know and I would pick up my kit and go. Anything was better than being home and seeing my parents argue.

In those years I picked up a few things other than cricket. I realized that my parents were just living their lives when the rest of the world had put some pressures on them: when to marry, when to have kids. Zorawar and I saw the difficulties and the problems they went through as people in their twenties and thirties and what that meant to us as kids. I was older than Zora by eight years and I found myself increasingly turning to cricket to fill my mind and time. Cricket stopped being a straitjacket and became a solace. Zora was adrift. He was pushed into a corner, told to do this or do that and went through a lot of issues. He is coping with them in his own way now.

Personally, I think the rift between my parents happened because they married when they were very young: my mom was about eighteen when she got married. She had me in a year’s time. Dad was just twenty-two. In their earliest photographs, of which I have a huge one in my room in Chandigarh, anyone can see that they are a very good-looking and happy couple. They look like they are made for the best things in life. But they were still growing up and becoming their own individual persons. No wonder things went bad.

When conversations get a bit serious with my parents—which happens—I always say to both of them, hey, don’t forget that the best thing that happened in your marriage was me. It makes everyone smile.

My views on marriage may be influenced by what happened to my parents but let’s look at it from a common-sense point of view. No one, man or woman, should marry for the sake of marrying, just because it is some idea of a ‘perfect time’ dictated by the world. Like, if you have crossed twenty-five and you are a woman, or twenty-eight and you are a man, it is as if a fire engine runs through the lives of everyone you know with a siren ringing, spelling out in Morse code: M-A-R-R-Y. Marry them off soon!

Initially it felt awful that I came from a home where my parents were arguing. None of my friends knew that I came from a troubled home. I didn’t tell anybody. Family matters are personal, best kept at home and sorted out within the family, and anyway I am not a moaner. 

My mother moved out a few times and stayed away from the house to try and sort things out. It was hard. She was my go-to, my comfort and safety zone. Dad would tell me I couldn’t meet her. Meeting her was rationed, allowed only after cricket practice, exactly like the fixed quota of my half-hour meeting with friends after nets. On days like that, cricket became a battleground between Dad and me. He wanted me to do something one way and, as I grew older, I wanted to defy him.

It was not only spending time with friends and Mom, Dad also hated it seemed the very signature of my batting: hitting the ball in the air, sending it ballooning over the boundary and out of sight. His dictum was very 1960s and 70s: keep your head down, play along the ground. On a cricket field, let me tell you, you are by yourself. Once you are in the middle, it is not necessary that the orders given from outside are always going to be followed. Not when you are sixteen years old anyway and have limited control over yourself.

In a Ranji practice match, I was once out for 39, hitting the ball in the air and Dad got to hear about the dismissal. That evening he went back home and told Mom, ‘Tell Yuvi not to enter the house or I will kill him.’ In those words. (And Dad kept a gun at home.) So Mom made sure I got the message. Don’t come home. He is very, very furious.

I stayed away from the house. That night I slept in my car, a tiny Maruti, parked in the sector next to ours. The next morning when I heard from my mother again, Dad had left the house and the coast was clear. I came home to get cleaned up and eat breakfast. Dad returned while I was at the table. He must have noticed the Maruti parked outside because his face was red, like there was smoke rising from him. I was terrified. I knew he did not want explanations from me, he wanted to vent. And vent he did.

Without warning, he picked up the glass full of milk on the table and threw it straight at me. It missed my head and broke the glass pane of the window behind where I was sitting. Then I received the full volley of his abuse. Most of it is unprintable but I remember in the middle of it he said that had I not been his son, he would have shot me, that I had ruined his reputation, and that there had been no point in training me so hard.

When I look back on that day, everything comes into sharp focus. Fear and anger made me shake, at the same time I couldn’t say a word, couldn’t challenge him, couldn’t fight. Because there was the other thing—I had played a stupid shot. This was around the time I was trying to establish myself in the Punjab Ranji team. And it was as if Dad, Yograj Singh, the player of one Test match and six ODIS, was angry because he couldn’t get me to renew his ties with cricket and take him beyond what he had done himself. He so badly wanted that to happen. At such a time, there can be no understanding, only extremes of emotion. Through all this, my mother tried to save me from him. She was trying to protect her son from her husband, from his own father.

Everyone knew whose son I was. People had seen us in the nets together. When I played a rash shot, they had seen Dad rip the non-striker’s stump out of the ground and fling it at me. As soon as he left the net, I would go skywards. When he returned, I would show great respect and hit along the carpet. Everyone in Chandigarh knew what he was about. No one messed with me because no one wanted to get into an argument with him. At the same time, because I was his son, I got plenty of grief from people who had a problem with him.

As it happened I had scored enough runs in junior cricket to make my firstclass debut for Punjab at the age of fifteen. It was in February 1997 against Orissa in a Super League game in Mohali. My score from that game is a lovely 0 as opener, and I dropped a catch. Though I did not know it, I was carrying a stress fracture in my back. Possibly because of it I misfielded and it immediately earned me the label of a bad fielder. Under the circumstances I thought it would be unwise to go home that evening and find Dad there. I did the next best thing. I went to the team hotel and marched into my teammate Sandy-pa’s room.

Sandeep Sharma is eight years older than me and when we met for the first time in the Jalandhar heat, he thought I was a bit loony. It was boiling under the sun and he found me grinning, joking and generally looking happy. His first words to me were, ‘Are you feeling cold?’

With my big fat 0 on debut, I went to Sandy-pa’s room and asked him to order dinner for us. Only when he fell asleep very late at night did I decide to head home to my own bed. The next morning in one of the newspapers on the dining table I saw the headline next to my name: India Gate. The ball had gone through my legs at the game. When I got into my Maruti I found its music system was ripped out.

My performance gave many guys the chance to score points against Dad. They couldn’t have done it to his face earlier but after the 0 and dropped catch on debut they got an opportunity to mock his son’s cricket. That hurt us both. Growing older, I saw the connection. The only way to get back at the viciousness against my dad was through my cricket. As I became more independent and mature with age and travel, and my performances began to count, I felt more responsible. 
 
Slowly but steadily, I started making a name for myself. If others were scoring 50s, I was scoring 150s; if others were scoring 100 once in a way, I was getting two or three 100s in succession. It was like this in the junior tournaments, under- 16s and under-19s, and soon the teenage quicks weren’t that into bowling at me. I got the reputation that I could hit big, hit long and hit constantly.

I remember one time while playing for India under-19 against Sri Lanka in a home series I sent two of their main bowlers home. One leg spinner was the victim of a full throttle straight punch to the bowler. He split his right hand’s webbing. After a few overs a similar shot again. The bowler couldn’t get his foot out of the way. He got two toes fractured. And after that I smashed four sixes in one over. If only cricket were all about the under-19 level … then I would have been its Viv Richards! 

As teenagers, bowlers don’t send the ball down quicker than 120 kmph, and you can smack them around. The great advantage for me was that when the bowlers were older, and the pace went up a level to 130-140-145, I didn’t have a problem. I found I could play a level higher than my age. Those wet tennis balls and that cold marble wicket had taught me good. Those hard yards with the Sher were there in my head when I faced Brett Lee and Jason Gillespie in my first game for India in 2000; I could manage them. Everyone was astonished but not those who knew Dad and his regimen.

What Dad also trained me to do was to stretch myself. To get more. To want more. It is what a cricketing life needs to be built around—seeking more. But because it was Dad who kept pushing me along, I didn’t grasp the need for individual, self-starter improvement until I was much older.

There was a two-year gap between my first and second first-class games for Punjab. In those two years in between, I filled out. I worked on my fielding. Being second rate at anything bothers me and fielding is the easiest of cricket skills. I was called a bad fielder on the basis of that one catch on my Ranji debut and that set my teeth on edge. In any case after the India Gate headline Dad took it upon himself to make sure I threw myself into fielding practice. ‘I will make you the best fielder in the country,’ he declared. Soon the routine of countless catches, mindless diving and hours of fielding drills started. He would hit the ball like a bullet and I would be expected to stop it, the next ball, the next ball, and so on, to the point where you could have hit my palm with a hammer and it would not have hurt.

The second time I played for Punjab was in February 1999 against Hyderabad in Secunderabad. I scored 20 and 18 and got two catches and affected one run out. But the runs weren’t enough and naturally the question being asked was whether this senior level was too tough for me.

I would say I was lucky to have Vikram Rathour as my captain. He believed in me and told me so. The rest of the seniors were, let me say this, quite horrible. They were negative towards younger boys but I managed to find two slightly weather-beaten rocks in the side to lean on—Sandy-pa and Amit Sharma, who became my friends for life. They were my guardians and mentors. He is not doddering yet, but Sandy cannot even remember how long we’ve been friends. The rest of the older fellows, including the management and players, made it a point to degrade and talk down to the younger players in the team. It was never about what you can do, what you are good at. It was about how inadequate you are. Negative stuff the entire time. It was a pointed way of trying to break a young player’s confidence. Harbhajan Singh, who had come into the team at that point, and I especially got the maximum dose. Apart from Vikram, Sandy and Amit, it was as if the rest of the older lot did not want us to be there.

Once I misfielded and one of the seniors said to me, ‘If the coach had been watching you, your career would have been over.’ Another guy—each one knows who he is—said I played too many shots in domestic cricket so I wouldn’t be able to survive in international cricket. (Sandy asked me to ignore that comment and said it was the very reason why I would succeed.) I was told that I was only seventeen years old and I should behave accordingly on the field. Once at nets, I asked someone to pass a ball that had gone a long way back. The coach said, ‘Cricket toonay khelna hai, tere baap ne nahin.’ (Hey, you’re the one who has to play the game, not your pop.) One senior once said to Bhajju and me, ‘You guys are lucky you are getting to play with us.’

There weren’t too many teenagers playing first-class cricket for Punjab and maybe it made most of the senior guys a little nervous. They didn’t like it. They wanted to be seen to be way better. Well, too bad.

In those days we would play ‘days-cricket’, the long-form game, and it was all I knew. The short game is a totally different animal and I was to learn its skills and demands much later. What I did know as a teenager, though, was how to bat when the team needed runs.

It took me three years of playing the Ranji Trophy—or rather sitting out for the better part—before I felt I really belonged there. I got my first 100 in the Ranji Trophy in November 1999 against Haryana. Vikram Rathour and I opened the innings for Punjab at the Nehru Stadium in Gurgaon, after Haryana had scored 279 on the first day. The wicket was a turner and at the time I thought I couldn’t handle spinners very well. But I got stuck in and my friends tell me it was the innings where they saw me go up a level.

Vikram and I had a partnership of 180. It was the first time I could go past 60. The match was drawn but we won first-innings lead points and I will never forget that 100. The moment I crossed the century, it was like ankle weights had fallen off my legs. Now that I had a first-class 100 no one could say this wasn’t the game or level for me. The senior guys in the dressing room could not carry on and on about my dad. It was such a revelation, that moment I felt like I was thirteen again, on the top of the mountain in Chail. I got out on the third morning, after making 149 (291b (21x4, 2x6))—kept it on the carpet, didn’t I? I was still a few weeks short of my eighteenth birthday.

This was the time before mobile phones and the Internet. I had to wait in my room for Dad’s call in the evening during every away Ranji game. ‘Kya Kiya?’ (What did you do?) he would ask. If I had done badly, I would get roasted. But that evening in Gurgaon, I waited for the call. I was itching to tell him that I’d ruled the world, that my teammates were impressed, that I’d scored my first 100.

The phone rang and I snatched it. It was Dad. ‘Kya Kiya?’ I told him my score and was stunned when his reply was not a roar of approval or a shabaash, but: ‘Why didn’t you score 200?’ I got deflated. Two hours later, I got another phone call. Dad said, ‘The keys to your Honda City, they’re kept in your room. I’ve had the car washed. You can drive it when you return.’

Speechless doesn’t quite describe it. I began laughing when I put the phone down. That, I realized, was my dad. Quite like the Indian cricket fan, he lives between two extremes. I had to find my own way to make my peace with him. I think I have.

Now that my Ranji century was out of the way, I sought more. Around this time a very important thing happened at home. I had told my parents that we had to find a way for them to be calmer and more understanding, to make it easier for their children. I had been trying to patch up things between them because I loved them both dearly. Besides, Zora was not even ten. We couldn’t stand the fighting anymore.

I think they understood the corrosive effect their relationship was having on them and us. They decided to separate, and Mom moved out of the house. I think it was the best thing that happened to me till then. It meant my mother could finally live her own life, my dad his own. There were no issues between them that had to be argued over in front of the kids. I lived with my dad for a bit but the big difference was that I had turned eighteen. He couldn’t tell me that I could no longer visit my mother. Dad decided that he had better let me do whatever I wanted. It was tough for Zora who needed both his parents but had to split his time between them.

One of the things I learnt in my teenage years was to understand the difference between anger and aggression. My dad had a ridiculously angry personality, and Mom could also be a tigress if she got pissed off. The way they used to fight, it was scary. It is through all of that that I learnt internally to keep a lid on my own anger, to control it. Anger is a bad quality that all of us have in us but we need to keep it under check. Rule it before it rules us. When I am on the field doing business, I know how to handle myself.

Aggression is not anger, aggression comes from performance. Aggression is a throw fired back cleanly at the keeper from point or cover, to have the batsman rushing to his crease. You have to use your aggression to get the opponent’s heartbeat up, his mind racing, to force the mistakes at his end. Not yours.

Maybe this helped my cricket and, on the field, helped me think calmly in crisis situations: keep the emotion aside, think what would be the best option to take. The attitude might have propelled my name ahead of everyone else in the queue when people started looking for a new bunch of players for India—but it was two specific events that led me there.

My first important breakout performance came in the Under-19 Cooch Behar Trophy final of 1999 against Bihar. Keeping the wickets for Bihar was some chap called Mahendra Singh Dhoni. In those days when there was no IPL, the Cooch Behar Trophy was the biggest event for young cricketers, second only to the Ranji Trophy. I remember it was December. Not even a month had passed since the Haryana 100. We were in Jamshedpur.

By tea on day 2, Bihar were all out with a score of 357. The next morning I aw that the local newspapers were extremely excited. It was a rare achievement for Bihar. They had put up a fighting total. The two days that we had been
fielding, the ground had been full of the local crowd making noise and jeering at us with claps and taunts from the stands. That morning while having breakfast I swore to myself that we would do well. In that match my opening partner made 95.

I spoke to Amit Sharma on the phone that evening. He was very impressed with my news that we had gone past the Bihar total. He asked me, ‘How many did you get?’ I said 358. ‘And you?’ He was confused. Then I clarified, ‘Paaji, ‘keyle ne banaye hain!’ (Brother, yes, that’s my score alone.)

Dad, of course, asked me why didn’t you score 400? Punjab Under-19 finished with a total of 839. Vivek Mahajan, with whom I put up 341 for the third wicket, was not out on 280. We had batted the title away from Bihar. I can tell you the crowd was absolutely respectful and quiet by the end.

This is the kind of business I really liked doing; taking charge, controlling the flow of the cricket match and dictating the result. I had got to know what I liked about cricket: I liked scoring big and I liked winning. It was around this time that the small but key group of people who keep an eye on junior cricket—a few coaches, some young reporters, maybe a handful of administrators—started talking about me as a prospect for India. Some labelled me a prodigy.

Oh and Sidhu had told Dad by now that he had got it wrong, and that Dad had indeed made a cricketer out of me.

After that Cooch Behar Trophy match, I went to play the Under-19 World Cup in Sri Lanka in January. Early in the tournament, it went badly for me. I got out cheaply against Bangladesh. It was a group stage match. If I couldn’t score now what would I do in crucial games? I was moaning to the coach, Roger Binny, when he said, ‘Yuvi, you could end up being the most valuable player of the tournament.’

In the semi-final, we faced Australia. The Australian side had these blokes who went on to play for Australia: Nathan Hauritz, Mitchell Johnson (who went wicketless), Shaun Marsh. They were a good side and India piled on the runs against Australia, but some were worried that the total wasn’t enough. We weren’t kicking on like we should. While I was padded up, I told a bunch of young Kenyan cricketers watching from the sidelines that India could get 70–80 in the last ten overs. I didn’t think I was being cocky. I really knew I could do it. That day, I scored 58 off 25 balls and we reached the final. In the final we beat Sri Lanka and I was Player of the Tournament.

With these two events I built the reputation of being both a fire-starter and a troubleshooter. It got me into the Indian team. The 2000 ICC Knock Out Trophy in Nairobi (later this tournament came to be called the Champions Trophy) was a fresh start for the senior team, which had just come out of the match-fixing controversy. We had a new captain. It was without some experienced seniors and guys like me were picked to fill the gaps. In the first match that I batted, which I mentioned earlier, against Australia, I was the highest scorer in the match with 84 and was declared the Player of the Match too.

India reached the final in Nairobi, and we did not win, but a group of us tykes, who went on to become friends—Zaheer Khan was one of them—earned ourselves a name in the game. We had arrived. I felt naturally able to deal with sides like the Aussies, who were in their prime. Their pace wasn’t a problem, I could ignore their talking, could handle their bowling. From now on cricket and I were buddies, roommates, fellow travellers. The Nairobi success became my ticket to the big life.

People were excited about my performances and finally Dad was proud of me. So I asked Mom and him for a favour. I wanted them to be at the Chandigarh airport together to pick me up when I returned. I wanted to see them with each other. They did that for me. It was the first time they spoke to each other after their separation.

Life changed completely after Nairobi—not just for me but for my family as well. My mother thought she was living in a dream where one day we were in a bad state and the next day her son was a superstar. She said it was like a beggar winning a lottery. The equations we had with everyone else changed. No more snarky comments about Dad or my cricket. Wherever I went I was recognized. It felt good.

My friends remind me of the mad things I used to do in the early days. When we went to the cinemas in Delhi and Chandigarh, I would hide behind Sandy-pa so that no one could spot me. And then when we were driving around, I would stick my head out of the car and point to myself and say loudly to bystanders, ‘Hey, I’m Yuvraj Singh.’ My only excuse is that I was twenty-one. When I think about it, I still crack up.

Nairobi gave me my first big pay cheque. With it I bought Mom a house in Mani Majra just northwest of Chandigarh. I stay in that house when I am in Chandigarh even now. Ten years back when I first got it, it was my safe haven. It is a corner house, at the end of a row of ordinary middle-class homes, three floors are built up on a small plot of land. Outside the main door is a set of shops and a dhobi who does the ironing under a tree. When I finally moved out of Dad’s house to go live there with my mother and brother, we realized how quiet and peaceful a house could be.

Over the next ten years, I gained a reputation as a consistent middle-order match-winner in the shorter version. Over ten years, I made 8,038 runs in the one-day game. It is a story I will tell another day. My father goes on about Test cricket still. It is the next target for me but it is not that over the years I didn’t try.

When I was younger I found many reasons why it didn’t pan out like I would have wanted. I was trying to break into a middle-order which was the best in India’s history. When I was in form, they played me in Tests on and off. These will-he/ won’t-he dramas appear in my Test career like a rash. In the historic 2003–04 series that we played in Pakistan, playing in the second Test in Lahore, I got my first Test century. In the next and final Test of the series, in Rawalpindi Sourav Ganguly, the captain, came back from injury and there was a huge controversy (because cricket media, of course, can make a big debate out of anything) about what the team composition would be. I had been picked to replace Sourav and he was back. But then I got this century. In the event, to accommodate me they dropped the regular opener and opened with Parthiv Patel, the wicketkeeper. That was fun. What was not fun was when a few months later, the shoe was on the other foot, and I was called on to open. Opening a Test innings is not all that fun I can tell you!

These days, I don’t like calling the unfortunate things that happen ‘bad luck’. Because when good things happen, I don’t put it down to luck either. Things just happen, you have to go with the flow, cope, handle it and move on. I have played thirty-seven Tests over nine years. The break-up of the number of Tests I’ve played per year reads like a bank account number: 1-5-4-9-2-4-6-3-3. In this span I have three 100s and ten 50s. There is no consistency or pattern there that I could hang on to.

But, like that tour in Pakistan, there are other happy memories. In December 2008, I batted alongside Sachin Tendulkar in Chennai in the second innings when we were chasing England’s 387 to win. India’s openers Viru and Gauti gave us a great start, but we lost our miracle men Rahul and Laxman early. When I went in Sachin was batting as if he was somewhere else. In another place, another zone. It had been a few weeks since the 26/11 attacks, we were all greatly disturbed, maybe Sachin more than us because the horror had taken place in his hometown. He went about the chase with clinical calmness and as we ate up the runs, I could see the England fielders looking worried, their body language was wobbly. My heart was racing as we neared the total but Sachin was not looking at the scoreboard.

Sachin finally scored 103 not out, I made 85 not out and I remember the noise when the target was reached, the second highest India had ever scored for a Test win, after 406 in Trinidad in 1976.I ran over to Sachin to lift him into the air and that was when he realized the match had been won, when he saw me racing towards him. Behind that in the distance, we saw another celebrating group of men and women. They were the ground staff who swept the wicket every day. I was told later that only three other teams—West Indies, South Africa and Australia—had chased more in the hundred and thirty-one-year history of Test cricket. I felt happy to have played a part in it.

After this match, I thought I had finally broken through into Test cricket. But in a year’s time the questions that had been asked earlier came back to haunt me. Around 2009–2010, I was honestly wondering what was going on. I went through a string of injuries that took too long to heal. I had dengue twice in 2010 and got fractured easily. I hurt my hand, broke one finger twice, then broke that finger on the other hand, broke a wrist, had a cervical disc bulge that led to acute neck problems. Looking back I think it was the cancer that suppressed my immunity. Doctors have said that this is probably true.

With such an eventful couple of years, when the 2011 World Cup approached it felt like the toughest dream to achieve. In the months leading up to the World Cup I was torn between confidence in my ability and the betrayals of my body. And yet, I remember, in October 2009, when I needed to go to Australia for treatment for my wrist, I had to get a chest X-ray, which is mandatory if you are seeking an Australian medical visa. My X-ray was clear.
Running and falling and dusting myself off. Finding the right balance. The World Cup was round the corner and I had to find a way to do that all over again.