MY FIRST INNINGS in the 2011 World Cup came in our second match. In the first match in Dhaka on the 19th of February, Viru Lala had got a little carried away. It’s his style. First ball of the World Cup, and he stepped back and smashed a four. Good afternoon, Bangladesh. Hello, World Cup! Because he is always so satisfied and happy, I call Viru Viv Richards Sehwag, Lala. Always like a happy businessman going about his day’s work.

After the first four, Lala went on to score 175 off 140. When he got out there were only fifteen balls left in the innings. Virat—Cheeku, because he once had a haircut in which he resembled the bunny cartoon from the kids’ comic Champak —was on 94. Yusuf went out for a quick bash. Cheeku got to his 100 and the team reached a total of 370. I didn’t bat. 

After winning the Bangladesh match hands down, we returned to India. The tournament was designed in such a way that the three participating hosts (India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh) would play their group matches at home. The two semifinals were in Colombo and Mohali, and the final was in Mumbai on the 2nd of April.

The schedule gave us an easy start. After the match in Dhaka there was a seven-day break, then we had to play England, and after another six-day break we were to play Ireland. We would be in Bangalore all through this period. Next, it would get a little busy: two matches within a week in different cities. After that we would come back to the south, this time Chennai, enjoy a break of seven days and play our last group match against the West Indies on the 20th of March. One month of the World Cup over. In our group there was Bangladesh, England, Ireland, the Netherlands, South Africa and the West Indies. The top four teams from each of the two groups would proceed to the knock-out stages.

Our second group game was against England. For the first time, at least since I started playing, they looked like a potentially decent one-day side. The team had a few acknowledged match-winners, like my old buddy Kevin Pietersen, who once lovingly called me a pie-chucker for my elegant bowling action. I thought this would be a good game to get a bat in.

On the day of the game, during our warm-ups before the match, I was getting ready at the nets in the Chinnaswamy Stadium. Suddenly I found I could not take my stance. My head, however gently and softly I coaxed it, would not pivot to the right and I could not gain the sight over my right shoulder. It was jammed.

This neck problem had started with a sprain in Sri Lanka in July 2010. When we got back to India, an MRI showed a disc bulge between the C4 and C5 vertebrae. Over the months the pain came and subsided persistently. At times it radiated through my neck to the scapula and down my left arm and I could not sleep all night. Sometimes physiotherapy would help and give me some relief. 

This time around at the Chinnaswamy, Nitin Patel was called out. He tried to unlock it but the neck would not budge. Fans standing nearby were waiting, and I felt bad that I could not even glance in their direction because I couldn’t turn my head that way. I couldn’t sign autographs, nor give them any smiling pictures. Moreover, I was seriously worried about my fitness. Through sheer willpower in the past I had been able get my movement back. Today even that was not working. Zaheer Khan, Zak as I fondly call him, was by my side at nets, and he kept saying it would be ok.

Zak is the ideas man in the team. Whenever we are in trouble we turn to him. He never disappoints. He is Zaheer bhai Idea-wale. My Idea Baba. Frustrated and in pain, I said to him that I couldn’t play the match. Zak looked at me in his calm way. He said, ‘Yuvi, you play, you will forget about the pain.’ I said, Zak, it isn’t that I don’t want to play, I just can’t. And what else? I should not hold up the spot. We went on like this in the warm-ups. He was firm: you play, you’ll forget the pain.

In January 2010 when I broke my wrist in Bangladesh, Zak told me this is small stuff, Yuvi, you are going to be the man of the World Cup. There I was with a fresh fracture, and Zak was talking about the World Cup a year down the
line. The thing with him is he won’t change his words. Our Idea Baba is a solid guy. He said, ‘You’re the man, you’ll win us the World Cup. You’ll do something for India, you watch. It will be you.’ Later he said it in Sri Lanka, he said it throughout the year, and on the day of the World Cup game against England he was still saying it.

So when I went out to bat in the thirtieth over, taking his advice that ‘bhagwan ka naam le aur bas khel ja,’ I said a quick prayer and took guard. I was in at no.4 with about twenty overs to go. Gauti had just got out, and Lala was back in the hut. Sachin was on 88, India on 180. Thank god, Graeme Swann is bowling, I thought, and not one of the quicks. I assumed an awkward stance, bent my neck at an angle and played two balls. Miraculously, as my body warmed, my neck loosened up and after that things weren’t so bad at all. In the next over, facing Jimmy Anderson, I hit a four. Keep it on the carpet, Yuvi, I was telling myself, Sachin is batting beautifully. The partnership has got to be careful. Sachin got 120 that day. After he got out, Mahi came on and we revved up. I got out in the forty-sixth over on 58. We had crossed 300. We ended up with a total of 338.

Then England took the game away from us. A few decisions went their way but the big picture is this: post-Twenty20 no one knows what a good score is. There are days when 350 looks gettable. In this match we didn’t take early
wickets, and Andrew Strauss played a blinder. 158 runs came from 145 balls, terrific stuff. The crowd was stunned, silenced. 

Then, in the forty-third over, Zak got Ian Bell and with the very next ball he got Strauss. From 280–2, to 281–4; finally, a chance! The crowd erupted. From here it took over and it pushed us, egged us on, as if it was taking the wickets.

It is pretty funny with crowds. When you are batting, at first you can hear them like a booming sound and then, when the bowler begins his run, the noise shuts down. You don’t hear anything. You pay attention to only the bowler, his hand, watching the ball coming out of the bowler’s hand. And when you are fielding, you need to hear the crowd all the time.

In the end we tied the game, and that was actually not a bad result. The match done, Zak walked over to me and drawled, ‘See, I told you, shut up and play.’ I realized I played that game only because of him and his constant nagging.

Who knows what would have happened if I had not played the England match. It was nearly two years since I got my last century and though there had been 50s and 70s, they had come between illnesses and injuries. I felt I needed to come into the World Cup with a score and what cricket commentators call ‘time in the middle’. For anyone who is coming out after a long layoff or is in bad form, time in the middle is very important. No matter how hard you work in the nets or how many throwdowns you have taken, the real match always has a situation. So when you get some time in the middle, you hit a few balls, middle some and then with the passage of time your flow and confidence starts coming back. It helps you to stitch together your thoughts and bat in a way you want to. I was glad to have the 58 I got here not just because they were good runs to get in a good match but staying out for about sixteen overs, getting to try shots against Swann and Anderson, that’s valuable in its own way. On the news that night on TV and the next day in the newspapers many commentators remarked, ‘Crucially for India, Yuvraj has found his form.’

Our next game was against Ireland. I was happy our longest stay during the tournament was in Bangalore because I love being in that city. The National Cricket Academy is in Bangalore. Whether it is for check-ups or for rehabilitation work, for fitness or for conditioning camps, we land up in Bangalore. Over the past year I had been in Bangalore a lot of the time—after Sri Lanka, for example, I came back to Bangalore to get my neck checked up and we found the cervical bulge—so to me it felt like a good thing to be in a place that was so familiar. It is a pleasant city where the people have always been good to me. And it was here that for the first time in months I got the feeling that I knew what I had to do.

Ireland shocked everyone by beating England before our game with them. After they won, when you saw their guys hanging around in the ITC Gardenia, where the teams were staying, you could easily make out they were walking taller, talking louder. One of their batsmen Kevin O’Brien had made a brilliant century to knock England down. 

We had to be careful as they were an unknown quantity for us. At the same time we did not have to be overly concerned. Paddy Upton, the mental conditioning coach, spoke to us all the time. He said it was ok not to top the
group. The bowling coach Eric Simons believed we had only so much stress energy to burn. We needed to get to the knock-out stages fresh, not exhausted. Got it. But Ireland? Surely Ireland was to be beaten.

On the 6th of March as the Ireland match began, Zak came out, guns blazing. First over, bang, clean bowled! Third over, a tremendous ball, caught behind, gone! And after that they consolidated. When I was brought on, it was the twenty-sixth over and the score was 118–2. In the next over Bhajju got a wicket. The partnership was broken at last: 122–3. With the first ball of my third over, I took a wicket: 130–4. I was kept on from one side. My next over yielded no wicket. My over after that, the hero against England Kevin O’Brien sent it straight back to me. Thank you! The next over nothing; then in my over after that, a horrible long hop was hit beautifully, smoothly, into Bhajju’s hands at extra cover. We started laughing. Two overs later I appealed for LBW and it was given out. The Irish decided to review the decision. The ball had pitched just outside off stump and would have hit the middle stump high-ish. Decision upheld, wicket number four, Ireland 178–7.

In my last over, on the fourth ball, the batsman came down a fair bit out of his crease to a very slow ball pitching back of a length on off. The ball caught his pad. Mahendra Singh Dhoni, now behind the stumps for India and leading the side, put up his hands in a kind of quiet, grinning appeal. I mumbled a  ‘howzzat’. We looked at each other. Mahi asked me, ‘Bat or pad?’ ‘Pad. Pad firs …’ I said. We pressed for a review. It was given! And there it was: a five-for. So many years, in Chandigarh, in Chail, in endless camps and competitions around the hot stadiums and dusty grounds, batting, batting, batting, who would have thought I would one day have a World Cup five-for to my name! In the cheering and the laughing I put up my fist and opened my hand and fanned out my five fingers for the crowd. The Bangalore stadium stood up in one big roar.

Ireland got all out for 207. When our turn came to bat, I went in at no. 5, and though we had thought the total was not tough, we were three down for 87 runs in the twenty-first over. It was no surprise that the Irish were fighting hard. I had two good partnerships with Mahi and Yusuf. Mahi and I shared 67 runs for the fifth wicket and Yusuf and I had 43 not out for the sixth wicket. On the scoreboard, it shut the door. I finished 50 not out. I got my first Man of the Match in the tournament.

The medal in your hand always brings a warm feeling, but that night when the match was over and we were getting our breath back, I could not shake the sensation that something important had happened out there. What a difference it made to me. I began to realize that my job was not to hit the ball out of the stadium. It was to go along the ground and finish the game for my team and my country. I had controlled the big hits and the powerful boundaries. Controlling the desire to belt the leather off the ball, it was like denying a basic impulse. Maybe like sneezing. Ok, not exactly like sneezing but you know what I mean. If your standard reaction to something all your life has been one thing, changing it is no straight task. What if I had given in, hit a few and got out? Who knows. The Irish hung in there and tempted me. I knew they were thinking that I would get out hitting. But I didn’t give them the chance. We got home chasing a total of 207 with only four overs left.

That innings against Ireland probably was a highlight for me. It defined my World Cup performances as before and after. After this match no matter how tough the situation was, I did not try to hit my way out of trouble. Instead I tried to fight it, play the game the way Dad wanted me to play my cricket—along the ground, not in the air, carving an innings out of nothing with the mere threat that I could go big.

I played the same way against the Netherlands in Delhi three days later. This time I was in at no. 6. Netherlands had scored 189. Chasing 189, we lost our first four wickets for 98 runs. When I came in I was content to take singles, defend. To many it looked outside of my nature. Well, they did not fully know my nature. Comments about my nature are often haywire. In this case, as far as I was concerned, I was playing in a way that let me do what I always knew I could do: change gears. I pride myself on being that player who has always been able to change gears. But maybe I have been seen more often shifting up. Here I was shifting down. It was as important. When I did it in the World Cup, I could see it was for my team, for me, and for those who had believed in me. When I started to bat well and get runs, I did not want to waste the start on the big shot. I had decided I needed to value my wicket, especially at those times when the fall of a wicket would be bad news.

Interestingly, when I was twenty-one or twenty-five, I did not think this way. I was a youth, I would go with the flow, and in ODIs the flow changes fast. In the 2003 World Cup in South Africa the responsibility was on the shoulders of the senior players. It was my first World Cup. I thought of myself as one of the kids. (The 2007 World Cup after four years is another story, which we shall leave for later.)

In 2011, I felt I was one of the senior guys. I had played two hundred and sixty-seven one-dayers. I thought of myself as being quite mature. But what is maturity? I think it is two things: instinct and experience. In fact, it is the kick you get from your natural gift, or instinctive ability, combined with experience, which makes you sober. In the 2011 World Cup, there was my one true love, whack the ball, and along with it, giving me strength, the knowledge buzzing in my mind that I had a lot of experience of reading match situations and I should make the most of it. Play for the team, bat within the big picture, keep it quiet and steady when required, build a base, don’t go out there, have a bash and feel happy thinking of the headlines.

In 2005–06, I was the Man of the Series in three back to back series. We played England at home, Pakistan in Pakistan and South Africa at home. I had centuries, good not-outs, and I finished games. That period is a memorable one in my career. I was proud of what I had achieved. But it was not till around this time in the World Cup that I started to fully appreciate what it meant to be really in control of my shots

In my 51 not out against Netherlands, I believed I hit the ball well, that I was ahead of the other guy’s thought process and was in control of my shot selection. I also got the feeling we get sometimes, that this time luck is on my side. I shall use the analogy of the topi to explain. A topi is a cap. In Hindi when someone changes their opinion on a subject all of a sudden, usually to suit themselves, we say that ‘usne topi ghuma di’ (he turned his cap). You can imagine we in Indian cricket find ourselves among turning topis a lot of the time! But funnily enough we cricketers are also always in a topi. I always say use the topi. If the sun is behind you, wear the cap with the peak covering your neck. If it is in front of you, wear it straight and keep your face covered. The topi needs to turn. You’ve got to be alert.

During the early pool matches, I used to joke with Mahi often. ‘Hey, come on,’ I would say to the captain in tight situations, ‘I can hit a six now.’ Mahi would get serious and reply, ‘No, no, play it down, play it along the ground.’ I knew I wasn’t going to but I enjoyed cracking the joke and watching him go red.

After the Netherlands match in Delhi I was at ease again. I had picked up another Man of the Match. We had played more than half our pool matches. I felt a sense of belonging once more after my year of being in and out owing to injury. I shut out the ups and downs I had gone through before the Cup. I was in what shrinks call a ‘good space’. Emotionally, mentally, thumbs up. But I was struggling to sort myself out physically. In these weeks of the World Cup, I had begun vomiting often. I could also hear myself breathing. The more ragged my breath became, the more Zak ribbed me, and our buddy Ashu, Ashish Nehra, would join in too. Getting old really fast, Yuvi, they would say. While they spent their sessions diving around, fancying themselves as Jonty Rhodes, I was creaking.

Normally I take my time going to bed. I am a bit of a night owl. But when I sleep, I sleep till late in the afternoon. For nearly nine months though I had not slept well because my neck had been troubling me. Every night that I spent tossing and turning, I would get nervous about the effect sleeplessness would have on my game. On nights before a match I would take a sleeping pill prescribed by Nitin. But these turned out to be useless. So before every World Cup match, I had the team masseur Mane Kaka or Nitin in my room putting me to sleep. Mane Kaka used to work very hard. One after the other, all of us players would troop on and off his massage table. I told him, ‘Kaka, in the next birth, watch, you’ll be a great player and I will be massaging you.’ Before the South Africa match, there were three people in my room at midnight doing everything they could so I would sleep. I felt two years old.

The next morning, I could not keep anything down. I usually don’t eat a big meal if I am expecting to bat but when things are fine, yes, breakfast is fairly large: eggs, toast, beans, potatoes. Before this particular match in Nagpur, I could not eat a thing. Guys around me thought I was nervous. I believed it too. After all, I knew I was a nervous batsman. But throwing up before an innings was taking it to a whole new level even for me.

I rationalized that I had been bowling ten overs and batting, losing weight, so I was tired but that can’t kill you. Go with the flow, I told myself even as I threw up. I wanted the World Cup, somehow, anyhow, I wanted to hold it above my head. On the health front I thought, let’s get to the finish line and then we’ll see. The World Cup is the biggest dish on the table. Everything else is a side dish. At the back of my mind I thought maybe I have a bronchial ailment, maybe tuberculosis.

In Nagpur, we couldn’t defend 296. Even though we had a great start from the top three, Viru, Sachin, Gauti—Sachin even got a handsome century—for all the batting that came afterwards, we could add only 29. In India, where media madness is always present, journalists, commentators, ex-players, jumped up to air the opinion that this team cannot defend a total, that the batting unit has not clicked, if one or two batsmen do well, the rest fail. The favourite hoo-hah: the Indians have mastered the art of botching up winning situations.

After we lost the game, we were not going to finish top of the pool, which was fine, because it humbled us in a way. The fact is we should not have lost that match and South Africa should not have won. We would probably meet Australia in the quarter-final as a result, which was not going to be easy. Never is it easy with Australia, who have always been one of the top three teams in international cricket. We had to be strong for them, so we poured our energy into regrouping. We flew to Chennai immediately for our last group match against the West Indies. There was a week’s gap and we filled this gap with reflection and chats. The chief selector Krishnamachari Srikkanth came over to the hotel and gave us a few words of advice. The team got together and spoke about the defeat and how we could get better from here. Sachin as a team senior, the coach Gary Kirsten and the South African-born explorer Mike Horn did one session where a lot of motivating things were said. Mike spoke to us about mind over matter. He was explaining that one needed to put one’s mind to something to make it happen.

As far as Sachin goes, when my career is over, one of the things I will treasure most is that I played in the time of Tendulkar, that I was his teammate.

People often think of me as a joker of sorts and I kept up the laughter and the wisecracks whenever I was with the team in 2010, 2011, but coming up to the Cup, I think Sachin noticed me worrying somewhere. No one understands that for a player of his ability and his achievements to every time find the youngest, most raw player in a corner and try to draw him out, for him to be this kind of a team-man, is a big deal. In his own example he has over and over again been a selfless teammate. This was going to be Sachin’s sixth, and probably his last World Cup. He must have been waging his own internal battles. I did not understand his battles but he understood mine.

I will never forget the conversation he had with me one evening over dinner in Bangladesh, just before the World Cup began. It may have lasted forty-five minutes. I had worked very hard for a year and things were not going my way. He could sense my disappointment. He told me I mattered to the team. When it matters, he had said, you will matter the most.


That stayed in my memory, and I kept replaying it in my head. Before this most important event of my life he tried to get me to relax, to turn the World Cup into a simple mission, ‘Play the tournament for someone you love or respect or for someone who is special and has played a huge role in your life. Play it for someone you think you owe something to. Make the World Cup part of that debt that you have to fulfil.’ As he was saying this I told myself that I will play this World Cup for you, you who I spent my childhood watching, you who I’ve grown up watching.

He often used this strategy he said. It helped him focus on the game. He was kind and generous and I was amazed that after all these years he cared enough about what I was going through and wanted to share. I got hold of a picture of Sachin on-driving a ball from my one-day debut in 2000 in Nairobi and I pasted it on my coffin. Well, we call our kit bags our coffins. Next to it I stuck a picture of me playing a similar shot. Every time I opened the bag to get my kit, I was reminded who I was playing this World Cup for.

I knew I would have to recover quickly for the match against the West Indies if I had any chance of keeping my private promise to Sachin. Frankly, by then I was fed up. I was fed up of people whining about our performance all the time.

The evening after the Nagpur defeat Nishant Arora who was covering the tournament for his TV channel and I were eating dinner together in my room at the Chennai Sheraton. The TV was on and the usual topic, about the Indian team’s fate at the World Cup, was being discussed, when Nishant turned to me and expressed his concern about our performance. We were eating Caesar salads with special healthy dressing so that my stomach would not get agitated. In Chennai I had started coughing a lot and spat blood in my cough. I figured maybe it was because we had lost the match to South Africa, and I had wanted to win. Seriously, World Cups can muddle up your insides and I thought maybe that’s what was going on with me.

So Nishant was there, looking at me intently, and I got caught by the mood and said very seriously that I was going to take India to the final of the World Cup. I said I would get fifteen wickets and 400 runs before the tournament was over, that I was setting this as a goal right here right now, and he kept staring at me puzzled. Normally I don’t say things like this. You can’t, in a cruel game like cricket. But some deep hunger inside me brought this out that day. Nishant knew I had not been sleeping, that I had been vomiting. Here was India’s most nervewracked World Cup player telling him we were going to get to the Cup final.

But why do the World Cups matter so much to us, ever thought of that? How does it go from just a giant cricket event to an ache in the Indian cricketer’s gut? Every four years that the Cup went past with India ending up empty-handed, this trophy turned into a larger and larger empty space in our souls. How did it happen?

For me it happened because the more I played for India the bigger its loss became and the heavier it got. Maybe it was because the very first World Cup I played in, we came so close.

In 2003 in South Africa, I was a rookie kid who was so happy to be there because he was playing alongside giant names. Our best batsmen—Sourav Ganguly, Sachin, Rahul Dravid—were in their early thirties. They were epic personalities, fit, sharp, their jaws jutted out, they made their intentions clear. Our bowlers too were a hell of a combination—Javagal Srinath leading, Zak, Anil bhai, Harbhajan and Ashish, who bowled in the 140s, following (when Ashu hit 149 kmph on the speed gun in Zimbabwe, we fell over in astonishment, but he remained his usual self, cool as a cucumber and full of contempt—for us batters).

In that World Cup we lost one match in the group stages to Australia and when we got to the final, again against Australia, we blew it. The bowlers will tell you that we should have batted first but I maintain Sourav’s decision to bat second was not a bad decision. The wicket was damp. It was what we did on the day, having taken the decision to bat second, that really turned our dreams, ambitions, beliefs inside out. The occasion dwarfed us. Our strategies and our plans got messed up by our heads. That evening after the match was over and we had lost, every time someone came up in Sandton and said, ‘hard luck,’ I wanted to shout back, ‘Luck? Luck had nothing to do with it.’ We simply blew it. Rather than concentrating on what we needed to do, our skills, our special qualities, we had tried to out-attack the Australians physically and mentally, exactly as they figured we would. That night I didn’t know if I would ever reach a World Cup final again, I didn’t know if we would ever get a team like that again. It was excruciating.

For me, there was also a historical reason: Dad. Growing up I would hear many of his friends in Chandigarh say that the 1983 World Cup should have been his. Instead it went to another guy from Chandigarh. The 1983 World Cup was Kapil’s Cup. At home we could never forget that. Yograj Singh, my dad the sher, was also a massive, fast-bowling, jumbo-hitting all-rounder. As a bowler people used to say he was quicker than Kapil. Two of a type but Indian cricket had room for only one of them. After Kapil’s victory in 1983, Dad slipped out of the picture. I wanted to fit him back in there somehow, to let people know that histories can be wrongly written, and sometimes we get a chance to rewrite the wrongs. I believed it was up to me to do it. That was my personal story and it grew and grew. Till it became that ache in my stomach.

The way it turned out, I was throwing up throughout the day of our last group match against the West Indies.

Chennai is a great city, and if they had great weather it could be paradise, but it is not. Everything is top volume, be it heat, humidity, or the crowd’s ability to whistle. It is not a place for the faint-hearted. Ever since I got there from Nagpur I had been coughing. Two days before the West Indies match I threw up my food and there was blood in the vomit. It was a harmless masala dosa I had slipped in between Caesar salads. Nishant, who was with me, said, ‘Yuvi, do you think you should see a doctor?’ and I was like, hey, it’s the 18th, the final is in less than three weeks. Don’t you think I have time to sort out my digestive issues later?

I tried to eat more rice. Roti I could not keep down but I found rice was manageable. Maybe I could retain about 20 percent of the rice I ate. Curd rice was good. Water, juice, energy drinks, by this time these were all into-Yuvi, outof- Yuvi.

During the match it was hot, and it made things worse. We were trying to set a  total but the match had to be stopped a few times because I was throwing up. My mates would look at me anxiously during the innings as I kept vomiting. Standing there at one point I felt a bit dizzy until Umpire Simon Taufel, for whom I have a lot of respect, asked me, ‘Are you ok, mate? Do you want to go off?’ His question made everything fall into place. Things became sharp and clear then: I knew I was in a happy batting place.

I told Simon, ‘No, boss, I ain’t going out. I am nearing 100 after two years so if I fall and collapse you can take me to the hospital. But until then, I’m not going out or going off. If I get out, I get out. Until then, I am staying.’ I got to 113. The total was 268—not bad. I knew we could defend it.

I was the sixth bowler. In the four overs I bowled I got Devon Thomas and Andre Russell. After a decent start, they lost six wickets for 9 runs. All out for 188. Victory by 80 runs before the knock-out stage. India were back.
It was now confirmed that we had pulled up behind South Africa in the group, and that meant that our quarter-final opponent would be Australia. South Africa, group winners, would get to play New Zealand, supposed to be the easier game. Or so everyone thought. Ha! What happened in Mirpur went to show there are no guarantees in cricket. As far as we were concerned, it didn’t matter. We didn’t want to be third, fourth, or even second. We wanted to be world champions. We would have to beat the world champions to be world champions. That’s the way the dice had rolled, and so be it.

One and a half years before the 2011 World Cup, we began talking about it. We asked the question: ‘Are we ready to win the World Cup if we play it today?’ The answer was no. After that we doubled our efforts. During every practice session, we talked about what we needed to do, we measured our progress, sometimes realizing ok, we further need to do this or that. We knew we had to be in the best shape physically, in the right frame of mind and working as a wellfunctioning unit. Nobody really spoke about it but the demons of 2007 had not left us.

The end of the 2003 World Cup final felt like such a horrid evening, we didn’t realize that worse could or would come. Four years later, we were pretty much the same bunch of guys going into the 2007 World Cup in the West Indies. The difference was that the team environment was awful. Everyone watched their backs, we were all under pressure, and the fun was completely gone. You can find ways to handle pressure from the outside and still grin. Anxiety from within, however, sucks the oxygen out of a team. It makes the air bad. There was so much negativity that we ended up with a heap of odd moves. The biggest example was that Sachin, who was getting tons as an opener, was moved to no. 4. Big mistake I think. Then, all of us knew the coach and Sourav, who was no longer the captain but still a team senior, were having problems. I could see a lot of the younger players were suffering. When we went on to the field, all of this together backfired.

We lost to Bangladesh, beat Bermuda, lost to Sri Lanka, and by our third match of the tournament we had crashed out. There was the disappointment of 2003 and then there was this. This was disaster. It was supposed to be a long
World Cup for us. We had expected we would be in the Caribbean till the end of April. Instead, it was still March and Bhajju and I were holed up in London, trying to joke about the fact that we were in hiding. In truth those were bad, bad days and we really had to wait for everyone in India to cool off before we landed in Punjab again. That experience stayed with me. This time before the tournament started I was so worried about my mother that I offered her a holiday outside India. I didn’t want her to be in the house if stones were thrown, if I didn’t perform or India crashed out. She refused.

I get what the World Cup means to us Indians. Cricket is a part of our heartbeat here. The Cup is the biggest prize and we Indians like big prizes. We don’t believe in half-measures. I don’t, so I am not surprised when no Indian does. I love our people because we are passionate and personal about the game. As a player you must quickly learn to roll with it: when you win, you are god, when you’ll lose, everybody will jump on you. It’s all-out attack.

Just six months after the Caribbean crash, we won the World T20 in South Africa without a coach. The adulation and celebration waiting for us in India was unbelievable. We landed in Bombay where it had been raining. There was a
parade in an open-top double-decker bus that went on for more than four hours through falling rain, beating drums and an ocean of fans. As a young player this up-down reaction confuses the hell out of you. Later you learn how to cope with it.

Now imagine a World Cup in India. Imagine that huge an event plus the 2007 legacy we carried. Everyone talked about India’s World Cup being ‘at home’.‘At home’ meant we were confined to a few four-walls for seven weeks: dressing
room, hotel room, and maybe one or two private places where we could talk to family, meet our friends. Other than the field, we wore our headphones everywhere we went and turned the volume up. From all corners there was just
one thing people were saying, ‘How will India win? Will India win?’ There was the constant seesaw of the people’s hope, expectation and the weight of public dreams. The bearer who came to your room with a club sandwich (I wish! I
mean curd rice). Before he said it, you heard it. ‘Sir? Tomorrow, sir. Win, sir.’ 

So much for playing ‘at home’! We had to play the World Cup as if we had put bags over our heads. We did not want to be talked to, we did not want to be disturbed.

But inside me, inside my head, the chatter would not stop. It was hard to keep an even keel. Doubts, disease, nerves and desperation, there was plenty going on. The year leading to the World Cup had been the toughest for me in my entire career. I felt older, maybe even slower, I felt ill. My body didn’t get injured anymore. Instead injuries of all kinds found their way to my body. When faced with many ailments, the worst you can do is try to speed up recovery. So I decided to be deliberate, slow, patient. Still there were times I felt that the clock was running on double speed.

At the beginning of 2010 in January, I broke my wrist playing in the Test series in Bangladesh. It was reported as a torn ligament but we discovered it was a fracture. This meant I missed the two February Tests against South Africa at home, and that annoyed me as hell. But I thought I’d find my way through the IPL. It turned out to be the worst IPL I ever had.

I found that people in the Kings XI Punjab franchise, some folks from the main ownership group, were behind rumours that I was deliberately underperforming because I was not the captain. It was rubbish, dirty rubbish. My integrity was called into question, and it got me angry. I had performed in the four games that we won, but the bitching got me down. Through all of this Preity Zinta, one of the owners, understood what was happening and stood by me.

Still, I felt wretched. It is the nature of the IPL that days are scrambled and there is no time for recovery. The tournament lasts as long as a World Cup. We travel every third day. The games finish late and dinner is at the oddest hours of the night. As a result I put on three or four kilos, which I didn’t notice until we were in the West Indies for the 2010 World T20 in May. There we lost. We played like we were tired. On the last night in St Lucia, as I tried to sort out a pub brawl, I found myself right at the centre of it.

We were eating dinner in a Mexican restaurant and one of our ‘fans’, maybe an NRI, came up to Ravinder Jadeja and started hurling abuse at him. He was shouting, ‘How can you lose? What were you thinking?’, and in no time he launched into language that belongs in a gutter. 

While Jadeja can be cool in a moment like this, Murali Vijay jumped to his feet and asked the man to apologize. Then everyone got involved. Before it could turn ugly, I intervened and tried to separate the two groups. I told  security to get the ‘fans’ out. I hate fights, as I have said before. I would like it if everyone walked off and cooled down in a corner but I find that usually does not happen. The fans who were evicted exited the restaurant and walked straight into an Indian TV journalist. By the time we had reached London on our way home, the story in the headlines was that half the team was involved in a huge pub brawl. Losing, drinking, fighting, that was the impression conveyed. Nobody hit anyone, no one’s shirt got torn but we could not say it clearly or loudly enough to be heard. We played bad cricket, and this story was the special aftertaste of that. We were a star-studded side, who had just crashed out of the tournament. So here is what the media made of the defeat: Party boys, hardly care for the game, over-pampered, overpaid, unfit and hardly work hard.

When teams like Australia lose they too are criticized at home but it does not get personal. What we get is fullblown character assassination. I still remember that some TV channels used random footage of us dancing at an event before the tournament and played that on loop with headlines like ‘Duds turn dancers’. A major Hindi channel wrote against my name, ‘naach phissadi naach’. My friends and family get angry and agitated. But I try and laugh it off. What else can one do?

After this episode, some targets needed to be found and one of them was me. I was dropped from the team. Maybe it was a fitness issue. I don’t know. Maybe it was disciplinary. For once, a selector kind of warned me in advance that I had a fifty-fifty chance for being picked for the upcoming triangular in Zimbabwe. Usually we find out in the press, or a reporter finds out and sends an SMS.

When I wasn’t in the team, I tried to do everything I could. I knocked off my IPL weight, trained for a month and a half, played domestic matches, club games. It is humbling. You don’t live the five-star life but things become
simpler. I wanted to return to play for the Test team. 

In July 2010, I was selected for Sri Lanka. But being back in the Test team didn’t sort out my problems because soon I began to have the neck pain that wouldn’t let me sleep. The next two months turned into a different kind of hell. I would end up taking treatment sometimes as many as three times a day.

I had a relapse of dengue fever so I missed the second Test though I had a half-century in the first. For the third Test I was dropped. My confidence was shaken. In the tri-series with Sri Lanka and New Zealand which followed after the Test series, I had no fifties, no match-winning knocks.

When we came back, I was dropped for the two home Tests against Australia. In the following tri-series, this time New Zealand-Australia-India, I got a halfcentury against Australia and two 40s against New Zealand but here’s where my slow, slow bowling started to develop. I think it saved my skin. It kept me in the squad all the way to the World Cup. In Guwahati against New Zealand I picked up three wickets and in the last match of the series, against New Zealand, another two.

Next, we were going to South Africa. I was not optimistic. I knew very well I was struggling with form, the runs weren’t coming, but I put my head down because what I could control I was trying to control and that was my fitness. I kept my diet under control. I couldn’t be as quick as I was at twenty or twentythree, but I had to be in the best shape I could be. I wanted to field at least 90 percent of what everyone remembered of the young me. No, of course not the one who dropped a catch on his Ranji debut! I was determined to be in the best shape possible when the World Cup started after two-three months. In South Africa, where I first began to cough and then to vomit, naturally I blamed it on the nerves.

I have faced the Aussies many times. They have a knack for pulling off games you think they are going to lose. It’s like they are born to fight, born not to give up. I have admired that quality in them but I have experienced equally the other side. No matter who says what, it’s hard in sport—or maybe it’s hard for us Indians only—to hear abuse targeted at one’s mother or sister all day and then have a drink with the same guys in the evening as if nothing happened. Australians are aggressive but sometimes their verbal gets quite nasty. It is why they get involved in ugly spats and then have to lecture the world about playing hard and fair.

When I played my first game against the senior Aussie team and scored 84— this was way back in October 2000—I received abuses from the entire inner circle. When I played my first Test against them four years later, in October 2004, I heard Shane Warne and Matthew Hayden go on and on. They were unbelievable, quite nasty, especially towards us youngsters. At night Warnie got hold of me and over dinner tried to explain why they did it. That’s the way he was bought up in the game. He said that’s what makes one tough; the game is not for the faint-hearted. Ok, that’s fine, I thought, but I would not do the same to a youngster trying to make a mark. Sure, you learn that to compete against Australia you have to be tough and thick-skinned, but maybe they could learn a few things from the rest of the world too, like balance, perspective. Anyway, things have got better with the IPL, after the Australians started sharing dressing rooms with Indian players and other players. I think to a large extent things have settled down. It’s good.

In the World T20 semi-final in 2007, I got into a bad verbal fight with Hayden. We had decided that if they were going dish it out, we would return the favour. And in the end the scoreboard would tell the real story. We won the match. For the World Cup, now, I knew they were going to target us in their same two ways—with the short ball and the verbals. So, I knew in my response I would just have to keep my full attention on my batting. The more I could bat, the more I would hurt them. I decided I would not get into any arguments with any of the Aussies in the quarter-final match.

On a tough wicket in Ahmedabad, Ricky Ponting hit a fine century, but it didn’t take them into the realm of the impossible. Australia made 260. It was not anything like the 359 they put up in the 2003 World Cup final. I thought every one of the bowlers—Zak, Bhajju, Munna, Ashwin—was superb with the ball. I got a couple of wickets. But forget all that, this was the match in which as a side we fielded like monsters. I won’t be surprised if the Aussies wondered which Indians had turned up that day. We played a different brand of cricket. Compared to how we played in the earlier round’s matches, we were rolling. Now, just as the gameplan had been, we were into the three biggest matches of our life and we were switched ON.

I remember going out to bat when we lost Cheeku. We had been doing well so far. Then Gautam got run out and Mahi came in. Mahi and I have been together in a few partnerships in our time. Our left–right combination works well. When Mahi came out, it was 168–4 and you could see that the Aussies were probably calculating that to really get to the tail and climb all over us they needed maybe two wickets more.

I was on some other plane. I was hitting the ball cleanly, nothing into the air, all along the ground. I thought back to how I used to be in my early days in the Ranji Trophy and thought how foolish a young batsman could be. Then suddenly, with the score on 187, Mahi was out. Brett Lee bowled one that climbed an extra inch. Mahi cut to Michael Clarke at point. Clarke held on and we had about 74 left in the chase. Mahi started walking off stone-faced and when he was passing me he did an unusual thing. He normally doesn’t say anything while walking out. He walks and walks out quickly.

This time he quietly said, ‘Shabaash, Yuvi. Stay till the end.’ You won’t see it in the TV footage, but there was no cool there. It was faster than a second and I think it lit a spark. Suresh Raina, the new man in, was the last recognized batsman. When Suresh was walking in, my mind was muddled with racing thoughts. I was thinking maybe this is the toughest and the most challenging situation I have faced on a cricket field. This chance may never come again. If I get out we won’t be able to win the game. The dream I was visualizing of beating Australia in the World Cup will stay unfulfilled. My mind was cluttered and I was getting nervous. So I went to the side, realigned my thoughts and repeated to myself what my dad has told me all my life: watch the ball, hit straight down the ground.

I felt it most naturally that what I have to do now is shepherd. They needed another wicket, we needed another partnership. No attack till we got to a point when we would need eight or nine off an over. 

Suresh got bombed with short balls. And that day he handled it well. At one point he got into some kind of an argument with David Hussey. I went to him and said don’t mind what they are saying. It’s a sign that we are getting to them. Put your head down, focus on your batting and let’s get this one run at a time.

Our partnership lasted less than an hour. We put up the required 74 runs. For the first time in twelve years Australia was thrown out of the World Cup. They may have won three titles, but not this one. We got there with two overs to spare. No huffing, no puffing. Calm, tight, methodical, clinical work and that too in the middle of all the tension and ever-louder verbals from the Australians.

Why did I get so mad after hitting the winning runs? As I finished the innings with a boundary, I collapsed on to my haunches and held up the bat, waving it left and right. It was like something that had been building up in me burst through. When I crossed 50, I didn’t raise my bat. The job was not done. I had an eye on the scoreboard. I could also see the Aussies were flagging. A little earlier, diving to field a ball that I had hit that was going to the boundary, Lee began to bleed when the ball jumped and hit his face. I felt they were all bleeding internally now. People tell me the noise at the Motera was unbelievable, but out there in the middle, it felt very quiet. I couldn’t hear the noise. All I could see was a white ball and the target.

After the loss of 2003 I had dreamt of hitting a six to win a World Cup final against Australia. But this would do for now, a four to eliminate Australia and take us to the semi-finals. The K’naan song ‘Wavin’ Flag’ was playing inside my head. It was the song I had been listening to for one year, in my darkest days, all odds against me, downed by injures, visualizing beating the mighty Aussies. I don’t even remember sliding down to my knees at the end of the game. I have seen photos of that moment where I am roaring like a freed beast. In one of the World Cup parties my friend Farhan Akhtar told me that my face reminded him of an image of Cassius Clay standing over Sonny Liston. I checked out the photograph and, of course I wouldn’t want to compare myself to the great Ali, but I guess we’re both looking angry and relieved at the same time.

That night when I walked into the press conference I was shocked to find myself at the receiving end of a round of applause from the media. I am someone who has always managed to be on the wrong side of the media. I had to remind
myself of the forever-turning topi but in that moment, I’ll admit, I felt quite surprised at being appreciated and felt I must have done something really quite special.

In less than a week, the semi-final was upon us. It was our next passage of pressure. Suddenly, just like that, the World Cup had zoomed towards its conclusion. The semi-final was scheduled on the 30th of March and the final on the 2nd of April. Meanwhile, what was happening with the other teams from our group was: South Africa had lost to New Zealand in the quarter finals, West Indies to Pakistan, and England to Sri Lanka. Here we were. Our semi-final match was against Pakistan and it was going to be at Mohali, my home ground. 

There is always a feeling of history when we play Pakistan because of our bloody Partition history. In both the Punjabs, this side in Mohali and that side in Lahore, when we play against each other the emotions get more serious because Punjab itself was partitioned when Pakistan was formed. But history, future, whatever, in a World Cup, pressure and expectation never leave your shoulder. We had beaten Australia, the world champions, next we were up against Pakistan, who the whole world thought were our greatest rivals.

As expected the build-up was huge. Now the press said things like this was the real final, that this was a game we could not afford to lose. I once glanced at a TV to see what they were running. It was a programme in which everyone looked very hot and bothered and what they were discussing was whether they were putting too much pressure on us cricketers. Then came the announcement that both the prime ministers would be coming to watch the match.

As a team we stayed in our shell. But just when you are counting on things going exactly to plan, odd things start going wrong. The night before this all-important match versus Pakistan, an unwanted guest, my neck pain was back.

Unwanted and unbearable. I kept struggling all night waiting for it to go away. Finally at four in the morning I gave up and asked for help. Nitin turned up halfasleep and got down to dealing with the demon.

On the 30th morning the hotel mixed up all the breakfast orders. Somebody’s food went to someone else’s room. If you ordered eggs, you got paratha; your order was cornflakes, you got puris. My breakfast turned up one and half hours after I had ordered it, which left me with no choice but to take it to the team meeting.

At lunch time we didn’t get our lunch at all because everyone had become very busy and there were other very important persons to feed. So we piled into the team bus and got to the ground and ate sandwiches at the stadium, or bananas and apples. We won our ‘home’ World Cup semi-final on sandwiches and fruit.

No matter. Until that day I had played three matches for India at my ‘home’ ground and my total runs were 46. In one of the innings I got to 34, which can only mean that over the other two innings I got 12. When I finished my innings in this match, let’s just say my ground total was undisturbed. Yes, first ball duck. I walked in at my home ground to such a loud cheer and within no time, it was all numb, my timber shattered and my ‘love affair’ with Mohali intact. By now in this tournament I was feeling like a zombie, that’s true, but still I would have loved to add something to the total.

The bowling won that game for us, no doubt about it. We defended 260 with the kind of confidence as if there were at least 100 more runs on the board. Five of us bowled ten overs each. We divided among ourselves their ten wickets equally. I remember we kept waiting and waiting and waiting for Misbah-ul-Haq to take off but he never really did. By the time we got through Umar Akmal at no. 6 and Abdul Razzaq came out at no. 7, it seemed to me that we had dried up their scoring opportunities. I thought I could feel that we knew the game was ours. In the second last ball of the forty-ninth over, their last wicket fell when Misbah got out.

For a year and a half we had been saying in our team meetings, ‘When we play the final in Mumbai …’ For a month my body had been screaming at me. Now that the final was here, and we had made it, all I wanted was sleep. I wanted to sleep well and eat well.

The day before the final, the team bus was scheduled to leave the hotel for practice at the Wankhede at 9.30 a.m. When I opened my eyes it was a half past ten. For the first time in the World Cup I had slept four hours at a stretch. I don’t like being late. The older I get, the more I think it is silly not to be punctual. And we guys give anyone who is late for practice a solid ribbing. But that day when I got to the ground expecting the usual ragging that would be my due, I found no one said anything. The guys were doing their own thing, no one was fooling around, Gary was busy. There was not one joke about Yuvi turning up two hours after everyone else.

I went over to Gary. I told him I was struggling to get sleep. The sleeping pill was useless. Obviously Gary wanted us to be fresh for the final, he didn’t want me moaning about sleep. So he called Nitin Patel over and told him he was to give me an injection that night for a good night’s rest. Nitin resisted. He said the injection was a worthy idea but what if it made me drowsy the whole of the day. A sleeping tablet it would be, but a different one.

I forgot my anxieties for a bit when we gathered to talk about the match. All the guys who had played the 2003 final were asked to speak freely. I didn’t say much but when Sachin and Zak spoke I knew just what they felt. I was not the Yuvi of 2003, but when they reminded us of what it took to do the job, I could remember 2003 as if it had come to life again. Cricket had taken so much from them, they were going to make sure it gave them something back. Sachin laid it down plainly: on the field do anything you have to. Fall, break your bones, die, but do not let the ball through. For two hours we talked like this.

This was Gary’s last tournament with us. He had come to us in 2008. He helped us grow from there and cement ourselves at the top of the world rankings. Under him for the first time we gained the status of the no. 1 Test nation. Going into this final, Gary had his own demons too: of having come so close but never winning a World Cup as a player for South Africa. His last one-dayer was a World Cup match against Sri Lanka in 2003 in South Africa, which they lost. And here he was, guiding us into the final against Sri Lanka, knowing that in the history of the World Cup, never had any home team clinched the title. At a time when we were fragile, Gary pulled us together and made us a band of brothers again. This would be the best gift we could give him.

Meanwhile, Nitin rang up many doctors and every one of them had advised that changing the medication on the eve of such an important match could be a disaster. What if it didn’t go down well with my system or what if I overslept? That wasn’t a risk worth taking. So Nitin pulled a smart one. He brought me a pill with the same salt but the pill was a different colour. He told me that as requested the medicine had been changed and hopefully it should work.

That night, as I was about to pop in my new sleeping tablet, I told poor Nitin, who was at my side, ‘He can take whatever he wants, take away my life, give me pain … God, just give us the World Cup.’ In no time after that I was fast asleep. That night I had my best sleep in years. When I woke up the next morning, it was bright and sunny. In a few hours, we would be playing the World Cup final. Just then, Mom rang. She said she had prayed for me to get good sleep. I told her, her prayers had worked.

On the morning of the final, we had no big meetings, no big talk. Nike gave us T-shirts with three stars on them and said that when we came off the ground that evening the three stars should stand for three India World Cup wins.

It was Gary’s last day. He asked us to enjoy the day. He said, you don’t know when this is going to come back, so enjoy it. Remember we want to win this, we’ve talked about this for over a year, this is what we want real bad.

Then we left for the ground. I remember noticing how calm Zak was.

It was a hot day. Fielding first, we were on the ground from two in the afternoon to about five thirty. Zak bowled three maiden overs in his opening spell. We had all listened hard to Sachin. We stopped every ball that came our way. With our fielding that day, we saved around 25 runs. The Lankans scored 274. Zak took two wickets, I took two and Bhajju took one. Mahi effected a run out. To me it seemed we had come a long way from 2003. We had matured.

Paddy Upton had said he thought the day represented the highest pressure any individual would ever have faced or possibly could face in their career. But if you had walked into our dressing room when the match began I don’t think you would have guessed it was a World Cup final. We were ready. In the changing room we even had the music on.

When the time came to chase, I won’t deny there was a bit of panic when Viru and Sachin both got out, and the scoreboard read 2–31. But Gauti had been jumping all through the tournament that he had to make 100, had to make 100, and it was like we were all thinking, well, this would not be a bad time to do it. He had worked very hard through the event and here he produced what I think is one of the best innings I ever saw him play. He was composed, he was sure of what he was doing and it was unfortunate that he missed 100.

At the other end Cheeku looked steady but he got out in the twenty-second over and we still had 160 to get. Mahi went in. The offies were in operation and Gary talked to him about the batting order. He believed that at that stage a righthander would be better at playing the off-spinners—whether it was Murali or Dilshan or Randiv—than a left-hander. Also, Mahi going in to join Gauti gave us a right-left combo.

I was fine with that. The cricketing logic made sense. I padded up and waited. I had fortified myself by eating a lot of sweet bread to keep my sugar levels up and to keep the food down but I didn’t feel too high on energy. As it happened Gauti and Mahi had a sublime partnership of 109 runs for the fourth wicket, and to my mind they played the innings of their lives. Mahi had not had a great World Cup with the bat. I knew his time would come. He took the pressure and kept scoring steadily. On the other side, just short of his 100 tragically Gauti got out. When I went in we needed just over 50 to win the World Cup, the body language of the Sri Lankans was wilting and when in the forty-eighth over Mahi hit Lasith Malinga for two back to back boundaries, I knew we were unstoppable.

Then he produced that tremendous six and I thought I would just explode. I went mad and I wanted to hug him and hit him at the same time and keep doing so till he confirmed to me that this was it. That we had won the World Cup. It was a cool finish—we didn’t hit too many slog shots, except maybe the boundaries off Malinga and the six off Kulasekara—but it was exactly the opposite that evening for us. We cried like children. For some of us it had taken eighteen-twenty years in cricket to lift the Cup. It was the highest peak that all of us were going to scale together, and of course we wept. After that day, of course, all our lives were going to change, like mine did, but that day right then we didn’t care about the next day, the next minute, the next moment. In the country, in every village and town, in the streets of the cities, it was like Holi and Diwali rolled into one. Everyone, the country’s leaders and ordinary people, left their homes and came out to celebrate together, united, on the street. It was humbling that something we did could bring so much happiness to so many people.

So many people came up to me to say thank you after that night. They had taken the World Cup as personally as anyone in the team. Strangers would come and say you have made us very proud, it’s an honour to meet you, we are really proud of the way you played. To them I could only say thank you. That kind of respect you can’t buy or manufacture. No money, no house, no job can earn you the respect you get for playing cricket for your country, which almost every boy in India dreams of doing one day.

When I was in chemo for cancer, I would watch the canal outside my house far away in Indianapolis and suddenly something would trigger a memory of how kind and sweet everyone was that night, and how happy we were. I would look back on that time and ask myself was I foolish not to see the doctor? Neglecting my vomits, neck pains, blood-flecked coughs and sleepless nights, wasn’t I living on the edge? What was more important life or the World Cup? My answer to myself was if life throws me back there again into the same stage, I will end up taking the same decision.

Now, I’ll tell you a weird story.

Before the World Cup had begun, I selected two bats for the tournament. I marked one as World Cup no. 1 and the other as World Cup no. 2.I had used World Cup no. 1 in South Africa earlier in the year and was very comfortable with it, it felt good. I thought: this is the bat with which I will tackle the World Cup.

In February when I was packing my bags for the inaugural match in Dhaka the no. 2 bat was nowhere to be found. I hunted around the house in Delhi where I had left it, but I couldn’t locate it. I went to Dhaka without it. Unknown to me, Mom, who is quite spiritual, had asked a friend to bring the bat to her in Chandigarh. She thought she should take something of mine to her Babaji for his blessings before the World Cup got under way. It was this bat that  was taken to her Bade Babaji in Fatehgarh, which is about five miles from where her Chote Babaji is, in Hansali. Both are southwest of Chandigarh. When she got to Fatehgarh, a big congregation was in the middle of a sangat.

In Sikhism, devotees sit together in a community or a fellowship to hear prayers or a sermon or a lecture from a holy man. We call it a ‘sangat’. When Bade Babaji speaks in a sangat, thousands of people turn up to listen. Because the crowd becomes so big, the sangat spills on to open grounds outside Babaji’s gurudwara, and it was like this that day.

There, among thousands of the faithful, went my bat, World Cup no. 2. Carried by the driver, hidden by my mother in the folds of her dupatta. When it reached Babaji, he looked at it and said, ‘Oh, is this Yuvi’s bat?’ Loudly he announced, ‘This is Yuvi’s bat. It is going to the World Cup with him. Everyone in the sangat should bless it.’

That’s what happened. The bat went around being blessed by many, many people, hundreds, maybe thousands, who knows. Some touched it, some folded their hands, the sangat blessed the bat, they blessed me.

Mom came to Bangalore just before the England match. That was our second group match. In Dhaka at the inaugural match of the 2011 World Cup the two Vs of Delhi, Viru and Virat, had gone off like firecrackers in an opening ceremony. Yusuf completed the innings and I did not need to bat. But at nets I had noticed that the no. 1 bat didn’t feel right somehow, it was not as comfortable as it had been in South Africa. In Bangalore Mom gave me the no. 2 bat and because it felt a little different, and the other one not so good, I thought I should use it.

All through the World Cup, I batted with this no. 2 bat. I scored 352 runs, including a century and four 50s. I looked after it, I taped it, and it held together. It felt good, it felt lucky. No one told me the bat had been to Fatehgarh till, in IPL 4, in the very first match the bat broke.