HALF-CAREFUL, HALF-QUICK, I heard Sachin’s footsteps before I saw him. When he walked into the room, he almost knocked me off my feet the moment he was through the door. Such was the fierceness of his hug. I could tell he was fighting back tears. He may not be very tall but Sachin is strong as a giant (and his friendship is as strong too). He is a cricketing giant, of course, but that day I was meeting a friend, one of the first to come and see me after my treatment in Indianapolis. I was on my way back home to India. At Dr Einhorn’s suggestion we had stopped in London for a few days of rest, to get my immunity up and to break the long journey from Indiana to India.

Like I mentioned earlier, I still remember the first time I met Sachin. Dad had just introduced me to the gruelling life of cricket, cricket and more cricket. It was during one of those winters that the Indian team was in Chandigarh for a match. Dad thought the time was right for me to see a proper game. He took me to the Chandigarh Sector 16 stadium for my first international fixture and himself wandered off somewhere, maybe to meet his friends in the Punjab cricket administration, I don’t remember. What I remember from that day is hanging around quietly and alone. Soon I found myself in the players’ area and in front of me Sachin and Vinod Kambli, who were best friends and teammates from childhood, were teasing each other and joshing about. Two young heroes.

I stood by the snacks table fidgeting with the tablecloth, watching them. Then Sachin turned around and, addressing me, said, ‘Excuse me? Biscuit pass karna.’ Mutely, I handed him a biscuit.

A few years later, Dad invited Sachin and Kambli home for dinner during the Challenger Trophy, which is a fifty overs domestic competition. Leaving the Mohali ground in the evening after the day’s event was over, Dad piled them into our car. He remembered me too late, when the car was already full. ‘Yuvi,’ he said, ‘you walk back home,’ adding for good measure, ‘and don’t you dare be late.’ Which dad leaves his kid behind to walk home like that!

Now here was Sachin after all these years with me in London, on the brink of a wobble. As we chatted, he would get up often and hug me. I could tell he wanted to cry probably from a combination of relief, shock and overwhelming affection. This happens when you see another human being looking weak. I must have looked very weak, not to mention bloated and bald. I may have looked like hell and I may have felt feeble but that day my mind was free. I was with my friend. I felt that from here on I would be ok. I was on the mend. I was finally on my way back to the steaming sun and rough dust of our Indian greens.

I will always be grateful to Indianapolis. It gave me my life back. It was beautiful, clean and the best place I could have gone to get rid of my cancer. The doctors and nurses at the IU Simon Cancer Centre were brilliant, dedicated and wonderful people who saved my life. They saw me at my worst and put up with me. But when the end came I wanted to leave Indianapolis as quickly as possible because it would mean I had put the illness and the treatment behind me. This chapter of my life would finally, finally come to a close.

It had been many years since I spent more than a month in one place. On cricket tours, we move around constantly, changing cities and towns. Even if it is a swift-moving series that throws up one airport, hotel and ground after another to the point of monotony, the scene is continuously changing.

In Indianapolis a time had come of an endless monotony: of what I had to do, what I could do and what I could possibly see. Tests at the hospital, medicines in the chemo station, back in the apartment at night. My bedroom on the first floor, the slow trudge down the stairs, the living room, my mom cooking in the kitchenette. More chemo. Some recovery. The canal, the ducks, a stroll, TV. The months far away from home and from friends had worn me down. When I finished the third cycle, I left the hospital as if I was fleeing, saying bye to only those who passed me on the way out. I wanted to pack my bags and head for the airport immediately.

But when we went to him the next day Dr Einhorn told me that I had to spend ten days in ‘recovery,’ dealing with the after-effects of the last and the toughest chemo session. I was on blood-thinning injections, my WBC count was low; I could not just climb into a plane and fly halfway around the world under these conditions. By now Dr Nitesh was gone, Sandy-pa was packing up to leave; soon Nishant would have to get back too. I felt distraught. I felt desperate for friends, for variety, devastated that it was not yet over, that I was not being allowed to leave. At the same time, I felt sicker within, if I am honest, than I had before or during the final cycle of chemo. I was battling to leave for home but it was like my body had been snapped into half, broken from the inside. Those last ten days of recovery were incredibly hard. I was not prepared for it and I was left crying on the sofa. For two days I could not get up. From my video diary I know that I felt suicidal. I was in physical pain but I could no longer separate physical pain from mental disintegration.

While waiting for recovery after the chemo cycles, time dragged more slowly than ever. The weather became warmer, we started wearing sandals and cottons  again, the days became longer—and everything felt too long. Every minute took too long to tick out. On the canal I would see the joggers and it would irritate me that other people were running while I couldn’t. For how long had I been watching these lucky people? How much longer?

Nishant and Mom would encourage me with words like, Yuvi, it’s the last over, the last ball, just bat this out. At some point I realized I had to let it go. I had to accept that this was bad but it was going to be as it would be. I wasn’t going to be able to make time go faster. Then one day, after the ten days that must have felt like ten thousand, Dr Einhorn looked up from my test results and smiled. ‘You are good to travel,’ he said.

I had to stop myself from leaping off the examination bed, giving him a hug and running out of his office. That day when I left the hospital—even though I want God to always, always, bless everyone in it—I felt I was being let out of jail. I gave the good doctor and Jackie a signed cricket bat each. They looked amused. I doubt they had seen a cricket bat before. I gave a demo on grip, stance and how to play a glorious cover drive!

On the 27th of March 2012, Paroon came to the Cosmopolitan on the Canal with his big car and we started on the four-hour drive from Indianapolis to Chicago, which was the most pleasant drive I had been on for a while. I sang songs, cracked jokes. I looked out and enjoyed the scenes from my window almost free from nausea. I could see the colour creeping back into life. Once I reached Chicago I didn’t take long to get out of the car and get into the plane. I felt like the plane was flying me to a new life. The possibility of seeing the world through the little window of the British Airways flight was exciting me literally as if I were a kid travelling by air for the first time. On the phone a friend had suggested that I might want to check out New York. I laughed. No chance. Lady Liberty, next time! Madame Tussauds, here I come! Right now London would do just fine.

Inside the flight, I couldn’t wait for the plane to take off. Mom looked at me in that way she sometimes does, like Yuvee!, when I asked a flight attendant who was walking past for a glass of red wine. I raised the glass and said, ‘Cheers, Mom, we’re going back home.’ Two sips and I had to return the glass. I couldn’t drink it but I had wanted to mark the moment. As the plane taxied out fromO’Hare, I couldn’t stop smiling.

In London, it was back with Tintin and Babar. Tintin and Babar looked at me, looked after me, as if I had come back from a war. Mom left for India after a couple of days. It was Tintin who took me to see Peter Marcasciano, a nutritionist who had been a professional boxer and worked with a lot of athletes. Peter advised me to switch to organic, unprocessed food, completely free of preservatives. It would help my sugar levels and my immunity. It was he who suggested that I better be gentle on my body, start eating normally first and then get into an exercise regimen.

This was, I might confess, the opposite of the plans bubbling in my head. I had thought now with cancer out, cricket was definitely in. I was waiting to feel slightly better and then I would start training again. But when Peter spoke I really listened. It is the reason that I did not end up impatient and frustrated with myself.

I was staying in central London, amidst surroundings that I knew well and loved. The Indian team often stays at the Taj in St. James. Among my happiest memories as a young player are those of returning to the Taj in 2002 with the NatWest Trophy, adrenalin still pumping, walking into the lobby jampacked with fans. Nowadays they have apartments and suites in those beautiful old mansions around the quadrangle, with pillars and porches and a fountain. The buildings are more than a hundred years old. This was where I settled in for these last days away from home.

Dinesh Chopra, a journalist friend who had helped me earlier when we were running the rounds of labs in Delhi, came to London to be with me. While I was in Indianapolis he was covering the cricket series in Australia. I used to tease him to tears, saying that for him professional matters were bigger than personal relations. Poor guy. To make up for all of that, he came to stay with me. My energy was still fairly down so I wouldn’t go out much or do any of the tourist stuff. Instead, Tintin and Babar would drop in with food from their homes and we would watch IPL matches in the afternoons and evenings in my hotel room. When we ordered food the Indian chefs at the Taj would send me meals according to my new dietary demands: organic, unprocessed, more protein, minimum oil, nothing deep fried at all.

Although I had still not reached home, being around friends was like coming up for air. For months I had made an effort to keep things light. I had stayed positive and tried my best to hang onto my real self. What an effort it had been. But now I felt I could be in my natural state again, without worrying about depressing anyone or worrying that depressed people around me were worrying about hiding their sadness from me. There was also an unexpected mega-bonus. My chemo brain could now very readily supply such memory lapses that everyone fell to the ground laughing. 

For instance, one day soon after I was back in India, I walked into my Gurgaon house and found a man there waiting for me. My Gurgaon house is always buzzing with activity, with people coming and going all through the day: my friends, my mom’s friends, Zora’s friends, our common friends, aunts, uncles, cousins, architects, travel agents, chartered accountants, engineers to fix faulty air conditioners, domestic help, security guards, event organizers, couriers carrying gifts, postmen with fan mail, young cricketers, old cricketers. I had recently come back home after my treatment so when I saw this man with a big, friendly smile and he didn’t look familiar to me, I said, ‘Hi there, nice to meet you. Tell me your name,’ and cordially shook his hand.

The man was stupefied. ‘Sir,’ he said suddenly panicked. I looked more closely. ‘Sir, I’m your lawyer!’ Of course he was! If I had seen his name on a piece of paper I would have recognized it instantly. For some reason, I couldn’t recognize his face. It was, as I had been warned, the short-term memory loss that was one of the after-effects I suffered.

I apologized and described to him the state of my memory. In Indianapolis I would forget what I had eaten the previous day, who I was supposed to call back, what my friends told me. The memory loss was a side effect of chemotherapy and temporary as the doctors reassured me it would be.

In London, on the days when I felt stronger, I would get the guys to take me out. At first it was very unsettling to walk into the busy parts of the city like Oxford Circus with its bustling streets and crowded Underground steps. The world was moving at its own pace but my world had slowed down. I found myself laughing at the idea of clinging on to a whirling world. Nevertheless, it was exhilarating to step out, to be on the street, without hair, without eyebrows, but overloaded with joy.

Once we wandered into a food court at the top of a mall and wondered if we should stop by at the Indian cafe. We got close and within minutes people began to recognize me and started approaching me. Cooks, waiters, the guys who cleaned the tables, regular shoppers. They had recognized the hairless, eyebrowless me. They came to shake my hand and tell me that they were praying for me. Total strangers came from the back of restaurants, offering packets of food. ‘Please take this,’ someone said; someone else said, ‘I ordered this for you.’ Everyone asked, ‘How are you feeling?’ And always: ‘Come back to the field soon, Yuvi.’ It was overwhelming. I can’t explain how much I was moved.

We left and went on to a Japanese restaurant because I love the food, and it was light and good for my stomach. But all evening I could not shake off what I had felt at the Indian cafe. I called Mom, who was getting the house sorted out and putting things in order for my return. I told her about what had happened. I was itching to be back home I said. I heard her laughing on the phone. ‘I knew it!’ she said.

A house is a haven and all of us want to get back to its comforts, obviously. That is a cliché. But for me at that time in London I felt like my soul was craving it. I needed to begin healing in full and I could only do it at home. I was still weak but I could only be strong if I dived headlong into life again. It made me even more determined to come back to India and all its madness. I could not be happier to take the plunge.

As the plane circled over Delhi, I looked out with excitement. My sprawling city, packed with ribbons of roads full of crying cars, shouting buses, weaving scooters, slow cycles. Houses rubbing against each other, monuments hundreds of years old, small huts. It was April and the sun was already beating through the umbrella of haze. From the sky I wanted to take it all into my arms and hug it. I felt so greedy.

As the flight landed, butterflies rose in my stomach. Would I disembark and  step into another life? Would I ever be able to get back to my normal life? When I left India, only the people closest to me knew I had cancer. Hell, even I did not know for sure that I had cancer, or at least I had not completely accepted it. Now I had been through it and I was returning to a place where more than a million people knew I had cancer. I felt unsure of myself. Of course I had been on Twitter, posting my feelings and pictures, connecting with my fans. I had smiled, positioned the angle of my bald head, taken a photo and told the world I was doing all right. A million people had cheered me for it. But a virtual million is one thing and being in the middle of hundreds of real people is something else totally. I had gone public with my illness and now I was no longer Yuvi the son, brother, buddy, sometimes a national hero and sometimes a national punching bag, coming off a plane in victory or defeat. That life, my old life, I had perfected. I knew the expressions I would make: what people would say to me and what I would reply and whether I would smile as I spoke or look stern. Now my cancer had taken all that away. The guy coming off the plane this time would be Yuvraj Singh, Indian cricketer, World Cup Player of the Tournament, cancer survivor. I felt nervous and elated at the same time. When I stepped off the plane, what would it feel like?

On the flight back to India, the Jet Airways crew was surprised to see me there. They remained thorough professionals, went about their duties of giving safety instructions and handing out towels, food and drinks, not paying me any special attention. In the middle of their duties, though, they went off and put together a lovely handmade greeting card signed by each one of them and then came and surprised me with it. Welcome home, it said, get well soon.  

The moment I got off the plane, I was swept back into the life I had left behind by the sheer force of its pull. I was surrounded by smiles and greetings, wishes and blessings. I have often noticed while travelling across the world how only Indians feel at ease giving out free blessings no matter what age they are, no matter whether they know you well or not. That afternoon I walked through corridors and corridors of benediction. I heard people calling my name and saying, ‘Come back soon!’ Some quietly, some shouting. Make your comeback soon, they meant. Officers at immigration, staff at security, baggage handlers. My mother was waiting for me inside the terminus and it was hard to tell whose smile was bigger—hers or mine.

Out of the terminal and into the melee seemed like a time from the past, like  landing at an airport after a good series. A bank of TV cameras, flashlights going off, people pushing, shoving and shouting. There may have been about fifty people there, but at first glance it looked to me like two hundred. Thank god I was wearing dark glasses or without them they would have seen me looking quite startled. No matter how nervous I’d been earlier, I quickly found my stride. Cancer was the bummer, this was easy!

The rest of the day was a blur. The neighbours welcomed me with flowers and my mom handled the media outside the house. I went out to the terrace and talked briefly to the TV crews. When I saw Zora again, I felt a load lift off my shoulders. Zora, the gentle, quiet soul, my baby brother. He had done without Mom and me for weeks. Now that I was back, freed of the burdens of cancer, repaired and recovering, I was ready to look after him once more.

That night, when I lay in my own bed, I felt truly happy and blessed to be back. There was peace and quiet within me, and it did not come from the silence outside. During the day, people from all walks of life had come to see me.

Mr Rajiv Shukla came the very day I landed. That week the BCCI president N Srinivasan flew down especially from Chennai to see me. My teammates Viru, Irfan, Bhajji and many others took the first opportunity they could find. KP was in Delhi for the IPL and he spent an evening with me. I was touched and exhilarated.

Cancer turns you upside down. In body, in mind, in spirit. You have to get used to retaining food in your stomach again before you go about expending energy. It would take me six weeks to get my system functioning well. In this period it was important for me to eat the right food, not only to make up for what I had lost but to regain my health condition as a sportsman as fast as possible. What Peter had said was that a lot of good fat had been lost during the illness and I had to get that back. It was like leaving a child in a candy shop with a prescription for toffees. From the day I returned home, I attacked Mom’s gobhi parathas. Some of the organic stuff Peter had suggested wasn’t the tastiest in the world. I kept up with it but mixed it up with samosas and parathas. To be able to taste these things again, I was glad just to be alive! I tried to be active, playing table tennis (what Paroon called ping-pong in the USA) and pool. But I was off strict or regular training and I ate to get used to eating again. Gradually, the frequency with which I threw up began to decrease. My metabolism, always with a mind of its own, like a fast bowler with a temper, decided to switch off. As days turned into weeks, I put on weight. The more time passed, the freer I felt. The lighter my heart was, the heavier I got.

The truth was that I had realized that cricket had moved away from the centre of my universe. In my life, cricket had come to be replaced by cancer and although I followed our series during chemo and then the IPL on TV, after the treatment the cancer was replaced by something like contentment. The pressures of cricket were far from my mind, and the cancer had stopped eating at my peace. My world was full and I wanted to enjoy every minute of it. My friends and family were around me. I could eat, I could sleep … Maybe it was enough. I knew I was grateful.

A few days after landing in Delhi, I did my first press conference in more than a year. Walking into a packed room at the Pathways School near Gurgaon where we run an academy for kids called the Yuvraj Sngh Centre for  Excellence, I realized my last press conference had been at the Wankhede stadium after the World Cup final. Talk about life coming full circle. After the Cup final, I had marched into the conference room nearly at midnight, bursting with joy, energy and humour. I had shouted out, ‘badhaaiyaan ho!’ (congratulations to you!) to everyone in the room.

Now I could only walk slowly, I needed to wear dark glasses to keep out the glare from the camera lights which hurt my eyes, and I had to find the energy to speak if only for about half an hour. The journalists gave me a standing ovation, everyone, the sensible ones—you know who you are, and even the nutcases— even you know who you are! The session went on for close to an hour. By the end I was exhausted, but I was glad that I had done it and managed to talk for so long.

During my first couple of weeks back home, I didn’t want to think about cricket. By now one month had passed since my last chemo cycle. The IPL was going on in full swing and I used to catch the games on TV in Gurgaon. Then, as fate would have it, this time cricket reached out to me. The Pune Warriors got in touch with me, inviting me to come to a game and to meet the team I had captained the year before.

At the new Subrata Roy Sahara Cricket Stadium in Gahunje, a village about 30 km from Pune, the noise of the crowd was so loud that the stadium was shaking. This new stadium is like the Mercedes Benz of Indian grounds. As the arena throbbed I could feel my doubts and detachments beginning to go away. This is where I belonged. The crowds were cheering. Bats were swinging, balls were bouncing. I wanted to grab a bat, jump onto the field and hit the ball out of the ground.

When they asked me to hold a bat and knock a few balls around for the TV cameras I realized with a shock how far I was from that vision. The stands were raining claps but my body began to shake. With the bat in hand, the brain was communicating the right messages to the body, but the muscles and tendons coiled inside waiting to be released instead curled up more tightly. No one else could see this. Only I could feel it. Oh boy, there was a lot of work to do. My muscles had to be shaken awake again, their memory unleashed.

Watching the IPL at home on TV and being so close to where all the action was brought back fond memories. As Chris Gayle slapped one flying six after another, and I sat in my Lazyboy and clapped, I felt a pang. Soon the frustration began to kick in. After months of being a patient patient, impatience caught me. On Sachin’s birthday, I spoke to him and he ordered me to relax. ‘Yeh koi hamstring ya quad nahin hai jo phat gaya.’ (This is not like your hamstring or quad that just tore.) Still, I thought, I should take myself to the NCA ASAP, get tested, see where I stood.

After my test results came in, I decided I would target the shortest format. Less than a month after taking that plane from London, and returning to shouts of ‘Yuvi, come back soon’, I hit the training button. Starting with sessions in the pool of lunges, high knees, back flips.

I notice it feels good in the water, my body is flexible, pliable, energetic but I climb out of the pool and I think I am going to fall down on my face. My legs are made of jelly. An electric current runs up and down my legs. This jelly can conduct electricity.

We don’t really remember what it was like to learn how to walk as babies, do we? The moment I finished that pool session I was trembling, like I had never walked before. The date was the 1st of May 2012. India was going to play the first World T20 match in Sri Lanka on the 19th of September. Ashish Kaushik at the NCA had given me a small batch of exercises to start with. In six weeks I would have to dive into full-blown training.

I decided to use this time to take care of some pending things and wrap up my other commitments. I travelled to Chandigarh to meet my gurujis, held meetings for my cancer charity YOUWECAN, attended the Sports Illustrated awards where they awarded me the Sportsman of the Year for 2011. At the awards I met people I had not seen for months. Bishan Singh Bedi gave me the best hug he has ever given me. During his camp in the hills, I remember Paaji shouting at us, making us run around the ground. ‘Run ten rounds, run twenty, keep running till you collapse.’ I thought about my T20 target. Could I be cricket-fit within four months?

Among people who won awards that night were the footballer Baichung Bhutia, boxer Vikas Krishnan, the Rajasthan Ranji Trophy team and the ICC World Cup winning team as well. But the Sportskid of the Year award went to Karthikeyan Murali, an eleven-year-old chess player who had won the world under-12 championship. His smile was the size of a dinner plate.

My mom goes to temples and gurudwaras every week, and now with some time in hand I started accompanying her. When I met Guruji in Hansali he gave me a prayer. He told me it would help me if I recited it every day. It is called the ‘Chaupai Sahib Ka Paath’. It was written by Guru Gobind Singh, the last of the living Sikh gurus. Guru Gobind was a warrior, a poet and a philosopher and he first recited it when going into battle. Let me share two lines with you: 

Hamri karo haath di raksha

Let your protective hand shelter me

Puran hoye mere man ki ichcha

Help me fulfil what my heart aspires for

The prayer goes on, asking the Gods above for protection and assistance in times of conflict and hardship. I’ve been reciting it every night before I sleep and I find it calms me and brings peace to my soul. I don’t know if I’ve become more spiritual since the cancer or simply more humble. I say the prayer to still my mind and strengthen my purpose. It is my way of thanking God for His gifts, not merely the good things I have in my life, but for also giving me the will and persistence to fight cancer.

Before I realized it, the six weeks I was told to wait before going hardcore on the training were drawing to a close. I wanted one proper holiday before getting on the treadmill of life again. Not a trip snatched over a weekend between tours and tournaments but, for the first time, a proper vacation. Ten days with the boys. Tintin and Babar from London, and Ashish, Zak and Bhajji. We decided to go to Spain. We drove around, saw the sights, chilled in the hotel pool, stepped out for dinners, talked rubbish non-stop. Ash and Bhajji were out of the team and Zak was about to return after injury. There was enough time for every man to air his angst and double the time to have fun.

This was a holiday of plenty: friendships, jokes, laughter and food. I exercised for about three days out of the ten that we were away and that too for the heck of it. Zak was like, what is this, Yuvi? So I said, ok, no more half-hearted bench presses. After the holiday, I’ll get on with my training earnestly. When I got back from the holiday and put myself on a weighing scale I saw the digits racing past 100 and my jaw nearly hit the bathroom floor. Hundred and three kilos! At my heaviest I had been 95 kilos. Right away I stuck myself into a schedule that I couldn’t budge from. I knew my mission had to start here. These numbers were crazy. What was I doing wandering around in the hundreds of a bathroom scale! This is it, Yuvi, I told myself. Get ready to get down and dirty. Far from me having to go around looking for direction, inspiration, motivation, it found me. Like Zak had said, it has to come from within and it will. And it did. Now it was time to get from a set of numbers on a scale to a set of numbers on a scoreboard.