ONE AFTERNOON IN AUGUST I went out to the terrace in Gurgaon to check if there was some hint, at least a little smell of rain. Anyone who has lived on this side of the world knows that August is sticky and uncomfortable. If you are playing in India, be sure you will sweat and trickle till there is a puddle in your shoes. The weather is suffocating and you crave a refreshing breeze and a sudden burst of rain.

As I stepped out there was a gust of wind and to my surprise a peacock stood right in front of me. It walked around the terrace completely at ease. I had no idea where it came from. In our mythology a visit by a peacock is a mixed sign. There are many superstitions around it. Depending on what you believe in it can be a good or a bad omen. The peacock walked around my terrace, its crown perched on its head, blue neck glowing, like it was on a business visit. Its feathers were shimmering in the light and I saw streaks of orange and green. The peacock moved with a balance and a lightness of the feet that we batsmen dream of.

Just then I heard Mom shouting for me. ‘Mom, upstairs, on the terrace,’ I said. From below, I heard her cry, ‘Selection, selection!’ When she got to the terrace her eyes were shining with joy. She told me I had made it to the Indian team for the World T20. She had seen it on the news. I pointed to the peacock on the terrace. The peacock is a noisy bird and I took it as a representation that in my life cricket would not be silenced. It had been a good omen for me. 

Cricket and I. Here we were again. What a difficult journey it had been to this point, and now here we were standing at the start of the old life.

When I first came back from the US, Ashish Kaushik visited me in Gurgaon. No doubt he found a heavy, slow, lethargic Yuvraj. He came as a friend, not as a physiotherapist, but inevitably our talk turned to the comeback. He asked me if I wanted to come to the NCA immediately but I was just too weak at that time. ‘I’ll come,’ I said, ‘but after a few weeks, and maybe we could do some tests to see how far I am from …’

From what? In my most private thoughts, I knew that the future looked to me like a road that runs towards the horizon in a flat open desert and there is no way of knowing the distance to wherever it goes.

Ashish said, ‘What I want is for you to look towards being a normal Yuvraj Singh again. That’s all.’

But normal? Did I really have the courage to come back to the Indian team? It felt a mountain so high and my body felt so feeble that I could not imagine the climb. Being in shape, hitting the ball cleanly, running around on the field easily, being able to last forty overs a day, ninety overs a day, hundred overs a day. How would I ever be able to do it? We talked quite a bit but Ashish said nothing about the plan he had up his sleeve. He said come when you are ready and gave me a few exercises to do on my own. After he left, that night I remembered that Dr Einhorn had taken the trouble to speak to Dr Nitesh about cricket and its demands. He had designed his treatment plan especially for me. The doctors had been thorough and faithful in the mission to give me a treatment that would deposit me back into the normal world as a worldclass athlete. Medicine had given me the body that could do it. Now somehow, somewhere, I had to find the mind.

In the middle of May I decided to make a trip to Bangalore. The summer had begun and soon it would end and the home season would begin with New Zealand in India in August. The World T20 was right after that. It was at the World T20 that I had hit my six sixes in 2007. If I had a big poster I would have put it up on my wall to motivate myself. It was these sixes that I tortured myself with in Indianapolis and it was sixes that I had to get set to hit again. I made up my mind. I told myself, normal is: hit it out of the park. And after that if a friend asked me, ‘So, when do you think you might play again?’, I would grin, ‘Twenty20 World Cup,’ and watch the jaw drop. ‘But … But isn’t that, like, just now? In September?’ ‘Yes sir, it is.’

It so happened that Ishant Sharma was at the NCA in May for rehab following an ankle injury and Ashish asked us to play a match-up with each other, bat versus tennis ball. With his thin, tall frame, flying hair and generally downbeat expression, Ishant reminds me of a moody rock star. I call him Lambu. (Not very original, I know.) At our tennis-ball match-up, as the bright yellow ball left Lambu’s hand, my eyes picked up the line, and my feet and arms moved as if on their own. I found myself hitting through the line; and the ball? It flew over the ground and over the boundary. From the pit of my stomach rose something that must have been pure joy.

What had just transpired is called ‘muscle memory’ by doctors, but for me it was as if my old life was linking arms with the new one. As that match-up went on, I hit Lambu for seven sixes and he went ballistic. ‘Paaji’, he shouted like fast bowlers do, ‘you are a cheater!’ All I could do was laugh with relief. Whatever else my arms and legs and back may tell me, that day I knew that my mind was all right. I better mention here that Lambu hit me for six sixes when it was his turn.

In June I took my holiday in Spain. Immediately afterwards I checked into the NCA. In Spain when I tried to swim in the hotel pool I would be winded in half a lap. Before cancer, I could clear ten-fifteen breaststroke laps before my breathing changed. At the NCA it became clearer than ever that the parameters I had built around the 2011 World Cup had bottomed out. My endurance levels had gone down drastically and my stability and cardio-vascular strength was practically at zero.

At the NCA a three-man team was in place for my Project T20. Along with Ashish, there were two strength and conditioning coaches: Anand Date and Nagender Prasad. They were smiling and friendly and then they didn’t let me go. They were told, ‘Forget about his cancer’, and they did. They were to think of me as just a regular guy who had not worked out for six months and, boy, did they.

Ashish and I have had an excellent working relationship for a long time, by which I mean I play pranks on him all the time and he never minds it. I have fiddled with his mobile phone several times and sent out prank messages but he still keeps leaving it around. We have nicknamed him Ghajini after the superhit film since he is a habitual offender in forgetting things. He gives me the strictest workouts and routines and if I resist, he totally ignores that. So for all his sweetness and forgiving nature, and his college boy face, Ashish takes no crap when it comes to training.

Before I could return to my cricket skills, I needed to rebuild my fitness around its core, through Pilates, swimming and running. The first few days, my calves were set on fire. In the middle of a set my knees would shake as if I was eighty years old and knives were being thrust into my back. That’s what it felt like. Often I would haul myself out of the pool and tell Ashish I couldn’t do it anymore. Sympathetically he would say ok, take a break, get back your breath. A moment later he would order me back into the pool again.

The Bangalore monsoon came and began its drip-drip. I found the humidity draining on my energy and my general mood. After hours of body-busting training at the NCA, I would go back to my hotel room wiped out. Every evening I felt I was running uphill and my lungs were completely burnt out and I was finding that the uphill track was never going to get to the peak. The road in the desert had become a road on a mountain and still on the sides there was nothing but cactus. Many days I wanted to pick up my bags and go home. I asked myself what were my reasons for wanting to return to competitive cricket. Was I forcing this upon myself for no good reason? If my career were to come to an abrupt end right then, wouldn’t I have already got more than I ever dreamt of?

Then I figured that the mind’s questions were actually the body’s protest. A few hours of rest and the body would be silenced and the mind could easily win the debate. No one had forced me to come to Bangalore or made me give myself a target to go at. I was doing this for myself and for the people around me who had believed in me during cancer and had lived through my pain with their love and patience. Their belief had fuelled my belief and made me want to return to cricket. As much as I loved my life playing the sport and living the life of a sportsman, and as much as cricket had given me my identity, I knew that this time my attempt to come back was not only about me. That this time if I came back, I would be changed. It was not the old life I was trying to get back to. It was a new life that I was trying to reach out to.

Count your blessings, Yuvi, I would tell myself when I crashed on the hotel bed in the evenings feeling sorry for myself. The NCA, Ashish and his team, the work going into me; the BCCI … What if I had been a hockey player, or a runner, or a boxer, or a TT player? What if I had been one of the hundreds of Indian athletes who sacrifice so much for their sport—their youth, their family’s entire finances—and what if then I got diagnosed with cancer? What if I had been any Indian sportsman but a cricketer?

There would have been a few articles in the newspaper and some stories on TV. Federation bosses would have perhaps made the right noises and everyone would have clucked in pity. After that my family and my friends would have had to run around trying to get me treated. They would have had to put their own lives on hold. Had I been that other Indian sportsman diagnosed with cancer, I would most likely not have been able to bear what my loved ones would have had to go through. It would have been easier to give up and walk away from the sport I loved.

My good fortune was to be a cricketer. The BCCI and everyone in it had looked after me like I was someone from their immediate family going through a bad time. They had gone out of their way to guard my privacy, monitor my progress, keep tabs on my treatment, welcome me back, pay for my expenses and then do their best to ensure that I had every possible chance to come back into the game. The BCCI had shown such a large heart that it made me grateful and proud to be an Indian cricketer. In the NCA they had created for us state of the art infrastructure that made it possible for us to rehabilitate ourselves and work on our recovery.

Every day this was why I turned up at the NCA even if I had left the previous evening a creaking mess in the foulest of moods, wanting nothing more than to take a taxi to the airport. Every day I would arrive at the NCA to find Ashish and his team dead set on their schedule. ‘Give me a break!’ I would say but on no day would they lessen my workload or change it to suit my complaints and pleas. There was a schedule set down for me and that was that. No matter how long it took to do the exercises set out for that day I would have to complete them that day. On some days what should have been over by four in the evening went on till dinner time.

When the guys at the NCA paid no attention to my protesting body, I hit on a clever way to buy time between workouts. I would be at the weights or on the field, and Nagender and Anand would be counting reps or laps, and I would suddenly say, ‘Ok, guys, now you explain to me exactly the science behind what we are doing here, and how it is going to help me.’ As they struggled, I would rest, rest, rest, my muscles screaming for a warm bath and a soft bed. But Ashish caught on soon enough and orders were given: ‘Just ignore him.’

Ashish and I argued a lot about what he thought I could do and what I thought I couldn’t. He kept saying ho jayega, it will happen, I kept saying nahin ho sakta, it is not possible. He kept pushing me and occasionally he would dangle a carrot, tempt me with a small prize. If I finished a really beastly workload on one day, I could take time off another ghastly set the next day. These variations were all a part of their plans actually, but I would think oh wow! and work extra hard to get through the first day’s stuff. Nice carrots for me he thought up, nice gajar ka halwa! And I ate it up gladly.

The plan meant everything. If I did not finish a set of exercises on the day I was meant to, I would have fallen behind on the schedule they had made for me, and the schedule was based on the deadline I had set for myself. The schedule was so tight that the slightest slip and everything would go haywire. Maybe I would not be ready in time for the home season. Once the season started, and gathered its usual hard momentum, who knows if there would be a chance and when.

So hands to the bar and go, go, go. Weights I found easy, even though right at the beginning my body would quake. But running I would hate. When I was asked to run the first single lap around the Chinnaswamy Stadium, the ground looked enormous, five times its size. I could barely finish the round for the ache in my calves and the burning in my lungs. We began with one lap, then added more, and more, a bigger and bigger number, then laps with gaps for other training. The team wanted to take me to a point that I could complete eight rounds of the ground with ease. When I could finally complete those rounds after weeks of slow, tiring, lungripping, muscle-burning attempts, I remembered being in a wheelchair and marvelled at the human body and what it could achieve. 

July came. It was our cricket month but I was finding it hard to get past the fear of the ball and of getting hit by it. A goblin sat in my head and told me to back away because if the ball hit me, I would get injured again. To deal with my fear, we decided that I would first do my catching practice with tennis balls and graduate later to the cricket ball. It was like being a kid again but as a kid  learning cricket I was not allowed to fear the ball! Wet tennis balls and hard plastic balls were bowled at my head so I would never fear the ball. Who would have thought I would ever fear the ball? Life has a funny way of coming full circle.

In July my weight began to drop too but everyone who saw me, journalists and commentators and my seniors, had one worry. What is the hurry? Aren’t you trying to do too much too soon? Take it easy.

I understood the concern so I stopped myself from saying out loud my most truthful answer, because it would have been rude. That was: this is my body and I know what it can do. Instead, when people asked me if I was ready, I said I was training well, my body was responding well, and if they didn’t believe me they should take a look at my NCA report.

As for the NCA guys, they knew halfway into August that I would be 100 percent ready for the World T20 but they didn’t offer me that comfort so I plugged away. In addition to the gym and training rehabilitation I started playing in friendlies as well. I played in a friendly practice for a scratch Karnataka side against the India under-19s who were setting off for their World Cup (which they won). I held up ok. The harder twos made me a little breathless but given that two months earlier I couldn’t go around the Chinnaswamy even once without gasping and coming to a wheezing halt, hands on knees, head hanging like a shaking leaf, I knew this was not bad. I was getting better and better.

So in August that day when I was in Gurgaon on a brief break and the peacock turned up, as emotional as the call-up was, when the selection committee announced the World T20 squad, it was also not that simple. Comments about my ‘emotional’ (meaning sentimental) selection began going around on news channels and websites. I thought my selection should be called ‘emotional’ only because I was so emotional about it. I had been working for this for three straight months and I had met every parameter that Ashish and his team had set for me. I had passed the fitness tests. I had played the matches. What was ‘emotional’ about my selection?

I wasn’t at my leanest but for a short spell of time there I felt at my meanest. I hated being thought of as a charity case selection. What annoyed me was that the people who were throwing the words ‘emotional selection’ around had not tried to find out what I had been doing. It would have been too much work I guess to make a phone call and ask me or Ashish Kaushik what my state of fitness was.

At twenty years old I would have been driven by my anger. Cricket would have turned into a point-scoring exercise. I would have worked myself into a fit of rage, wanting to prove those guys wrong. Now I am older, and I hope wiser, and I know it is a waste of energy to wake up every day and try to prove yourself worthy to the whole world. And so the anger ebbed away. I decided to live in the moment and enjoy the fruits of my labour. At the same time, I was receiving congratulatory messages from strangers who said they had been praying to see me back on the field. I thought it was best for me to ignore those who did not like my ‘emotional selection’ and take greater joy from those who celebrated it. I was blessed. I couldn’t waste my energy. At this time I needed to concentrate on my cricket. September 8 was knocking on my door. I had a match to play.

The glitch in my memory that was the side effect of chemo continued to create funny and sometimes embarrassing moments for me. I had given a name to it, calling them my Ghajini moments. When I goofed up, I would say I have had a 
Ghajini moment. Ashish used to laugh, saying these moments were his sweet revenge. On the big day when it finally came, SEPTEMBER 8, in the dressing room  of the stadium in Visakhapatnam I had a spooky Ghajini moment. I got overdressed and realized I had fallen out of touch with my own team’s routines. (I’ll come to that in a moment.) No one caught on or they would have taken the mickey out of me forever and ever. I would never have lived this one down. 

It was a few hours before the match and my return to international cricket. The welcome back into cricket was as if all of India was giving me a giant hug. The guys had been great. There was hugs and back-slapping. They were curious about the cancer and the treatment. What does chemotherapy mean? Why can’t one take the medicines orally? Did it have to be intravenous? How the hell didyou manage!

When we landed in Visakhapatnam, the large sign outside the airport which says ‘Welcome to the City of Destiny’ made me smile. It’s been there for many years but I had never noticed it before. Now I have started noticing these things.  In the City of Destiny, welcoming me was every gateman at every door I walked through, the driver of the team bus, waiters at the hotel, the man on the street, children shrieking and rushing past cops to shake my hand. Buzzed, that’s what I was. So highly buzzed that on the day of the match I didn’t realize what I was doing. Visakhapatnam’s wide indigo sky was filling with clouds but I was pulling on my shoes and my match kit. Normally, on match days, we reach the ground in our training gear, we take our seats, relax, get a bit of food, and then go out for warm-ups. That is the normal routine. But that day I was in such a high state of excitement that I had my playing shoes on and was about to change into the full match uniform when I looked up and saw everyone else around me. They were relaxed, chatting, grabbing a bite, getting their kits sorted out. Outside it was raining.

Whoa, Yuvi. Chill. Take a deep breath. Quickly I slunk back to my spot, changed out of my playing shoes and got ready for the warm-ups. But it kept on raining.

When it rains in Visakhapatnam it is like the rain god has organized a show. The previous evening the sea had been churning up the surf opposite our hotel. When the rain started, it came down in heavenly buckets. Nothing like drizzles or showers here, it was a full stereophonic surround sound concert. The guys started playing one-tip cricket. This is one of the ways we entertain ourselves in the dressing room. We used a tennis ball, batting single-handed. Even on one tip if the ball is caught, but only with one hand, that is out, so you better hit straight and down. I threw myself into it, everyone else threw themselves into it and soon there was chaos.

A TV floor manager knocked at the dressing room and asked for me. Could I do a live interview with Ravi Shastri? From the sealed off dressing room to the outside was like changing planets. Despite the rain, there were about fifteen thousand people still in the stands and no one was going home. Everywhere I looked and as far as I could see, people were holding up banners with messages for me. ‘Goodbye Cancer, Welcome Sixer’ said one. Another one wanted me to hit six sixes in an over again. These people had been so patient and kind that later with a helper holding an umbrella over my head I took a lap around the ground waving and waving my hello and thank you to the people in the wet stands. The field was total slush. I stepped out in my chappals but they would get sucked by the mud and stuck to the ground. It had poured for three hours and the ground had turned into a pool. So I took my chappals in my hand and walked all around the perimeter barefoot. I wanted to embrace the stadium, every person in every stand who had stayed back. The last time I had done a lap of honour, it was the 2nd of April 2011, at the Wankhede. As I walked around, the Visakhapatnam crowd got up from their seats as one and started clapping and clapping and clapping. As the sound of people clapping and cheering intensified, I thought my heart would burst.

When we were told that the weather had forced the abandonment of the game I was crushed because I had felt so ready. My family and friends were in the stands. They had come from all over the world to see me play. We had twentyseven guests that evening; it was like I was going to my wedding. The night before the match, I had emailed the people back in Indianapolis. To Dr Einhorn I said, ‘Before starting my next innings, I wanted to thank you for saving my life. Without you this wouldn’t have been possible.’ I emailed Nurse Jackie and told her that her ‘support and smiles’ had pulled me through. She wrote back, ‘winning hugs coming your way’. I wanted them to have the satisfaction of knowing that I was playing again. I wanted to show them that what they had made me believe could happen had come to be. I wanted them to tell my story to their new patients just like they had told me stories of the people they had treated successfully, which gave me hope. I wanted my story to be a part of the arsenal in their armoury as they counselled others just stepping into chemo. You will recover and live normally. I wanted that story, my story, to give hope to someone else.

Dr Einhorn’s room is decorated with many awards and the citations that he has received for his outstanding work for humanity. His most precious wall he says is the one on which he has messages from people who have survived and gone back to their lives after treatment. I wanted my small story to be there. In Visakhapatnam I was aching to play, to feel the thump of ball on bat and the racing heart. But all of us have to bow before nature and live with it. I consoled myself thinking I had been given another shot at living and I would have another shot at playing.

Four days later at the Chepauk, I had got to grips. I had sorted out the sequence of training and playing gear. India won the toss against New Zealand and we were going out to field. As the team gathered itself to leave the room, I found myself both heavy and light, excited and anxious, worn down by what I had been through and lifted by where I was. My friends were watching me. One by one Bhajji, Cheeku, Rohit and Zak came up to me and gave me a hug. They were trying to keep it cool and trying not to look emotional, so there was much laughter and much boy-type blabbing: ‘good luck, champ’, ‘king hai tu, yaar’, ‘go get’ ’em’, ‘welcome back’, ‘well done’. I knew that if I started to tell them what that gesture meant to me, I would start blubbering.

Out on the grass at the centre of the stadium in the well of the cheering and whistles that Chennai is famous for, I found tears rushing up into my eyes. It’s the chemo and the cancer. They’ve made me emotional. I don’t hold back from crying anymore and I will admit to even crying more than before. I also don’t believe in the rubbish that it is ‘manly’ not to cry. Regardless, being seen doing so on a giant electronic screen at the ground would not be cool.

For the rest of that afternoon, I ran like I was fielding everywhere. I wanted to  be everywhere—point, short square leg, cover, mid-off, mid-on—and raced around like one of those battery-operated toys that go mad and bang into furniture because you’ve wound them up too much.

Despite what I thought of as my lightning fielding, New Zealand put up a very good score thanks to Brendon McCullum’s fast and furious innings. When it was our turn to bat, I went in at two drop with the score on 86 and less than ten overs left out of twenty. As I stepped into the lights at Chepauk, I was hit in the gut by the sound of the crowd. It was thunderous and tremendous and the stadium was filled with whistles. No crowd in cricket can give an Indian cricketer such a loud, long and high-pitched whistle of approval as Chepauk does. It is not enough to call the sound whistling in fact. That sound is Indian cricket’s seeti symphony, performed by an orchestra of about fifty thousand.

That night Chepauk was at its best and the ovation from the crowd almost knocked me off my feet. The occasion, the noise, it made a little jittery. From the corner of my eye, I saw a sign that read ‘Yuvi is Back’, and I wanted to repay the confidence the crowd had in me with a performance to match.

Mom was in the stands, having missed out on seeing me take the field earlier because her flight to Chennai was diverted for an emergency landing in Nagpur. A little boy was unwell and the non-stop flight had to make a halt. She was  sitting in the plane getting fidgety until the flight got clearance to leave Nagpur. She didn’t see me first step out on the field at the start of the game but she was
there when I went out to bat and she heard the crowd’s reception. When she talks about it, she gets goosebumps till this day.

As I started playing, I was a bit edgy for a few balls. The moment a couple hit the middle of my bat, it was like being snapped awake. The doubt and anxiety slipped away. A demanding situation in the middle of a cricket ground with thousands of people cheering. I could do this. When Daniel Vettori floated one outside my off stump my body was moving on its own again. I took a decisive step across the crease, down came the bat and met the ball, my arms following through, and the ball was sent over wide long-on. Six.

I heard the roar of the crowd only in the background because my mind was on the score and the memories in my head were loud. The last time I batted in Chennai, it was March 2011, and we were playing the West Indies in the World Cup. It had been a hot, sweaty day and I had been wobbly. I had been coughing and puking. I remembered the discomfort of that day like it was yesterday. 

As MS and I tried to crank up the run rate, it was hard to time our shots and we  found we couldn’t keep up with the climbing run-rate. We needed 32 from 18 balls, and then 25 from 12, I hit a six and yet we needed 12 in the last over. I was  out swinging and missing against James Franklin and eventually we lost by one run. The result did not go our way, but it had been a good game for me. I had bowled two overs for 14 and scored 34 off 24 with a four and two sixes.

A week later the World T20 started in Sri Lanka. It didn’t go well for the team. We couldn’t get through to the semi-finals. It was a big event. I felt apprehensive. Would I be all right on the world stage? I realized, yes. There was no stomach-knotting tension. There was no retained memory in my cells of the chemo that six months ago had battered me. I felt cool, calm, confident. I felt ready for victories and defeats. I felt prepared to win but also, and this is important, I felt prepared for the rough days that cricket is full of. It’s the rough days that are more daunting. You play cricket for the victories, of course, but the down days are no less significant as a percentage of the life you will spend in the game. I’ve been through some significant downs in my playing career and have learnt the hard way that appetite is a two-way stretch. You have to want to land the blows but you have to be prepared to take the blows too and you have to be prepared to let them hurt you. Or else work with a briefcase not a bat.

Against Pakistan, I got two wickets, and a direct hit run out which gave me much inner glee, and I hung around at the finish with Cheeku in an eight-wicket victory. The tournament format was such that we needed to win the next match against South Africa by a big margin. We won, but by a single run, and we were out. In that last match I was named Player of the Match. The TV presenter who gave me the prize said, ‘There have been some questions about your inclusion …’ I kept my emotions in check.

It was from here that I knew. I would be ok. I would play, I would be hurt, I would be happy, but I would play and I would be ok.

In cricketing terms, my next step was the longer formats. The Duleep Trophy semi-final game of North Zone versus Central Zone was going to start in Hyderabad. I went there to get the switch mentally and to see myself do ninety overs a day for four days.

Before I went we did the yo-yo cardio test at the NCA. The yo-yo routine tests if you can get through very high amounts of cardio activity with only short breaks in between. It is not a pleasant way to spend your time but I passed it and went to Hyderabad to play in my hundredth first-class match.

North Zone batted first on a run-scoring wicket. My turn came at 2-100 and my first target was to get to 50. If I played around 80-90 balls that would be a good span of batting after so long. Time in the middle, remember, is everything. Once I had crossed 60, I figured 100 would be good to get. As the day wore on, towards the end I started feeling a bit shaky. During a break I called for Ashish, who was in the stadium to keep an eye on me. He gave me a banana to eat. As a matter of habit I don’t eat much before batting. He thought my sugar level could be dropping. The banana was like rocket fuel. At stumps I was batting at 133. The next morning, I felt fine, did my stretches and began batting again. In no time I was past 200. When I got out I had 208, one run less than my highest firstclass score. I was out to my good friend Mister Murali Kartik.

Central Zone’s batting performance made us stand in the field for two days. I got through one hundred and ten overs, fielding in the slips but not needing any special breaks for a sit-down. At one point we had Central Zone at 9-342. Then Bhuvneshwar Kumar in the tail got stuck. He scored his maiden first-class 100 and with Rituraj Singh took the Central Zone score to 469, past our 451, and they got the points that took them into the Duleep Trophy final. 

The next match on my schedule was India A in a three-day practice game against the England team which had arrived in India for the Test series. You may have climbed out of your coffin to return to the field but at the international level you will get no extra sympathy. There will be a lot of respect off the field but on the field the game is the game and everyone’s in it to win it. When the game is on, no friendship and no extra yards. In that match I scored a 50 and earned a five-for (including Kevin with a yummy pie). After that came the selection for the Test side against England.

October was coming to an end. Within weeks cricket had consumed my life again. But I noticed the change in me. It was not like it would be when I was younger. Before cancer cricket would have become everything in my life at once. How had I been the entire time when the cancer diagnosis had not come through? Cricket, cricket, cricket. Only wanting to play. Not sparing a thought for my health or the disease. Desperately trying to stay inside the cricket bubble. Once the Test call came the guy I was earlier would have immediately disappeared into the cricket bubble, grateful for its noise and fast-paced life. T20 had started, Test cricket was on the way, I would be in the one-day squad too I could pretty calmly hope. But this time cricket—the cricket life—did not displace everything else. It did not edge out the memory of the battle against cancer and the battle for confidence after that. I did not hold on to the madness of cricket to run from the memory of cancer. Instead I held the legacy of cancer close and got my strength and inner peace from it.

In America, on the way back, and after I returned, I had a lot of time to think. I reflected on my luck. I thought often about that period of confusion before the detection, of being in denial, and then the difficulties of the treatment, and all the help I had got from people around me. When I came back the officials of the Indian Cancer Society told me that I had unwittingly become the face of cancer and cancer survivorship. This one thing motivated me in my bleakest moments of self-doubt. When I was totally down, I would claw my way to the space where I could ask myself did I not owe it to someone who was sick and watching me, or who had prayed and watched over me when I was sick, to pick myself up and dust myself off and run again? When I was ill I had felt that hope is the rescue rope out of the disease. When the chemical sadness hit me and I cried, when my scalp and skin was covered with the stinging sensation of a billion hairs trying to fall off and I cried, when I had to use a wheelchair and would have preferred to crawl and cried, it was only the hope that this would get over and life would come around again that took me out of those moments of despair.  

Back in India I wondered, if I could get back to hitting long and hitting strong, would someone lying in bed watching the game on TV after a long day in a chemo station feel a flicker of excitement and hope, even for a second? I thought they would. For that I had to play my cricket. For them who don’t live in cities with hospitals and cars, the millions of poor people in the villages who have no way of detecting what is wrong with them, I would do something else.

I decided to start a cancer charity and named it YOUWECAN. We can fight and we must. We can win back our lives and our passions. The charity was up and running by July. I went on TV to speak about cancer, to speak to people who had cancer. I wanted to be out there. No hiding, no dodging. I met a lot of families who lived with patients or had lost their loved ones. I started visiting cancer wards in hospitals in the towns I happened to be in. Sharing the pain with the patients was sharing an understanding of what we had been through.

In the course of this work one day in August I was in Mohali on a hospital visit when I met a gentleman who was fifty-eight years old and suffering from liver cancer. He told me, ‘Yuvi, it’s because of you I am in hospital today.’ I was taken aback. What did he mean? He said when the doctors told him he had cancer of the liver he decided he would not get treatment. ‘I am fifty-eight. I thought I have lived my life. I won’t put myself through the pain of chemotherapy. I will die in peace. Then I was watching the news and I saw that you have been selected for the team. And I thought if this young man can fight cancer and come back like this, how can I give up? I called up my doctor and told him I am ready for chemotherapy.’ I was shaken to my soul. From the time I came back from America I had heard so many stories of courage, from young and old, and they each gave me strength. I had to repay that debt of inspiration.

As I wind up this book, we are already in the middle of a busy season of international cricket at home. YOUWECAN is a strong part of my everyday life and my team and I try to do promotional events in the off-days between matches. In the background YOUWECAN is working all the time to see through its plans for mobile cancer detection units for rural India. We think we will do up vans with diagnostic equipment and staff first, which can go to rural areas and hold free screenings. The effort involved is huge. But we will get there. When I am done with cricket, as one day I will have to be, YOUWECAN will become my full-time job. 

For now this is the plan. I want to raise awareness about the fact that cancer is not a death sentence. It is not. I want to raise funds for the detection centres. Early detection is half the cure and if people can get simple tests done, it could increase survival numbers by leaps. Getting more detections will help set up a more widespread cancer registry in the country. An in-depth registry will give our doctors a better understanding of our country’s cancer map and how the medical community could target treatment infrastructure.

Underlining these plans is this mission: for the rest of my life I want to try to remove the stigma around cancer in India.

I am ready to talk my head off about how ridiculous some preconceptions around cancer can be. Is cancer infectious? Can you go into a house that has a cancer patient and ‘catch’ it? If a parent has cancer does it mean the children also will? Then should we be marrying our children into a family where there has been cancer? If a businessman has cancer, it must be a bad omen and surely it means his business is going to go bust? Should we do business with someone who has had cancer? Idiotic? Absolutely. The ignorance and superstition around cancer crosses all boundaries of blindness. Even from the most educated and wealthy I have heard this kind of talk. Not to mention the fact that even the cleverest, most intelligent, most well-travelled will often not want to deal with their cancer, preferring to take some quack at his word that alternative therapy has a cure rather than submit to straightforward medicine. Cancer is bad enough. Why also get silly?

Dr Nitesh once said something to me that was funny and at the same time sensible. He said human beings by and large are basically stone-age people. Or when he wants to be kinder, he says, ‘We are not very far from stone-age people.’ He means we find it as hard to deal with our normal stresses as at any other time in human history. Cancer patients, he says, are different. They have faced and come through the fear of death and they learn from that experience to simplify their lives and often find themselves emotionally in a better place. I notice that cancer has made me a less anxious person. More than one cricketer who survived cancer and returned to the game didn’t succeed. It could happen to me. I can deal with this thought and not feel weakened by it.

Meanwhile I can look around me and appreciate my life today. It is filled with happiness and gratitude. I have my family, my friends. Over and above that I play the game again. I have received the gift of joy and opportunity in abundance and I tell myself now you can’t be angry and you can’t be greedy. I went into my first match for India with no expectations. If I fail, I fail. If I succeed, I succeed. I really want to succeed but if I fail, it will be without any regrets. If I succeed, it will be without any swagger.

It has been a few months since then. I have been wearing my blue India jersey quite a lot this season and note happily that it fits me perfectly. In this time Test cricket has given me a glimpse of its hardships and its treasures. I will have to prove myself all over again. But I see that I have been given a second chance in life and I know that I intend to spend it running. If I fall, as I will, I look forward to dusting myself off and running again. That I can do.

There you go, folks. Yuvraj Singh 2012 is a post-stone-age man. If Yuvi can, you can.