THERE I WAS. Strung up in a harness, legs dangling mid-air in a studio somewhere in Munich, looking properly perplexed as instructed by the director. Fernando Alonso, the F1 champ, was on one side and Manchester City’s Sergio ‘Kun’ Aguero was on my other. For over a year now, my system had ejected, you could say, or rejected, most of what I ate or drank. And here not knowing about this shot I had just gulped down a glass of orange juice. Up in the air, swinging in the harness I thought, oh no, what if I throw up and ruin Puma’s set? Was I going to cover myself in shame in front of these world-class athletes by emitting an unglorious stream? God, please, I prayed, not now.

Many months of denial had caught up with me but this one commitment with Puma I had decided I had to keep. It was the only fair thing to do. Even after the kind of year I had had since the World Cup—I played only three Tests and no ODIs—my sponsors had stuck with me. Way back in September Puma had asked for a date to shoot with Bolt, Alonso and Aguero. It must have been a logistical nightmare to bring together athletes from four different sports and four different parts of the world. In September I had assumed January 2012 would be free and had given them this date. Then I found out I had cancer, and when I told Puma their instant reaction was not to bail out of the deal or create a fuss or become sour, but to tell me that I had all the time I needed to get better. I need not come to Munich for the ad shoot. As Ratan Tata, the Indian industrialist, says, and I sometimes repeat, ‘a promise is a promise’—and I wanted to keep mine. After all it was a matter of only one day. That’s why I was in Munich.

At the shoot we were put on a treadmill and made to run. Oh god, run even here, I thought. But then I found I was quite enjoying myself. Fernando was shy at first and warm once we got talking. He autographed a cap for me. I wear it to the races and cheer for him. Aguero started playing professional football at the age of fifteen and is Diego Maradona’s son-in-law. In a few months I would watch him win the English Premiership with City and remember the signed football he had handed over to me with a big Argentina-sized grin.

Each of us would have loved to have Usain Bolt around. A cricket-lover, Bolt was to be the central star of the evoSpeedPuma ad. He had shot his part and left. He had wanted to meet me, the director said, and of course I wanted to meet him; we would have yakked about cricket.

Being in such a boisterous environment temporarily took my mind off the truth that I had learnt back in India only recently—about the tumour in my chest. But then we were sent up in the harnesses and I remembered the glass of orange juice sloshing in my belly and the tumour sitting on my hammering heart. Luckily the juice stayed in for a few more hours until I had said goodbye to Fernando and Kun. 

In Munich I asked myself the question, how did I get here? Why was I trying to straddle two states of being, of the happy, public face and the anxious, private one? I am still trying to answer that question. 

In hindsight it makes me want to bang my head against a wall and ask the Yuvi of that time, what the hell were you thinking, man? But that’s life. The way my life has been anyway. Running full tilt and falling, then dusting myself and carrying on.

The way I see it, for the longest time far too much had been going on in my life for me to pay attention to the signals being sent to me by my body. There was the cricket, busy calendars, the mental reconditioning for the World Cup, but also the fact that over the last two years, I had constantly felt my body was under attack from all sides. Every time something new popped up my response was: Deal with it.

In ten years of cricket I had become an expert in anatomy. Rotator cuff, metatarsal, ACL, patella, adductors, I knew all the proper medical words for body parts that hurt. Like in Bangalore before the World Cup match with England, I promptly identified my neck pain as being caused by the bulge between my C4 and C5 discs. (Or maybe it wasn’t, I don’t know. After chemotherapy it completely disappeared.) This kind of knowledge comes at a price. As a professional sportsman you are constantly in conversation with your body, coaxing, pleading, demanding, and a time comes when you start thinking you know your body very well. When it still defies you it is a surprise but you know that a conversation can be had, a bargain can always be struck.

Being a sportsman I have spent my adult life outdoors, running around and throwing myself around. When you live like that you tend to believe that you are meant to be ever-reparable, indestructible. Dealing with health and fitness in the two years before the World Cup had put me in a frame of mind where during the World Cup, frankly, if I was feeling bad, feeling a little ill, it was to me second nature, a dull habit.

In Chennai during the tournament, when I saw blood in the basin as I cleared my throat, my first reaction was a stab of panic. And then, with smooth ease, the possible medical reasons. Maybe it is tuberculosis. Bronchitis? Nishant wanted me to ring up Nitin Patel and head out to see a doctor but I decided I would deal with it later. The puking on the field two days afterwards was put down to heat and humidity. Before the quarter-final against Australia, when Mane Kaka was massaging me so I would go to sleep, I would start coughing whenever he exerted pressure near my ribs. I considered it for a moment but I thought more about needing to get to sleep.

Though the coughing had only increased, the last ten days of the World Cup were so intense that I forgot about it. I was wound up about the tournament. I worried about what would happen if we didn’t win. I thought of people burning effigies and maybe even attacking our houses. I love our fans but I know what can happen when they get angry. Once again cricket gave me an escape out of medical thoughts. As I kept doing fine on the field, I found it easy to work my way around the off-field trouble even as it grew and intensified.

After the World Cup final, I spent the next twenty-four hours giving what felt like a thousand television interviews, like a zombie—but a happy zombie—and I am told that I coughed in every sentence I spoke. It didn’t bother me because the IPL started in eight days and there was just a little time to bask in the happiness of the victory and maybe go a little wild and have a little fun.

It is well-known that I love having a good time, isn’t it? I’ll tell you what. I go into clubs and restaurants through the front door, not hiding through the back, because I believe at a certain age, it is fine to want to go out and have fun and be normal. It is normal to be normal and especially then, in that first week of April 2011, we deserved every chance to celebrate.

Ideally, I would have taken my foot off the pedal, gone and seen a doctor. My body was pleading with me to do it. I knew something was off in the World Cup. I would struggle for breath when I ran 2 runs or more. After a bowling spell I would be winded. Maybe I was just afraid to accept it. My mind, though, felt heady, free, and it leaped months ahead towards dreams of the series on the other side of the IPL.

We were going to the West Indies first, then to England, then the West Indies would be in India and finally in our winter and their summer, December, we were going to Australia. A tough meaty year full of Tests. It filled me with excitement. With the World Cup done, I wanted to be a part of those series, make them the next great stride of my career. I became dead serious about keeping myself in shape during the IPL, a tournament like none other in the world.

Much has been said about the IPL. It may be played in the shortest format of the game—Twenty20—but its demands are immense. It involves six to seven weeks of non-stop travel, training and cricket at the height of the Indian summer. Teams go helter-skelter around the country in weather and ground conditions that are varied and extreme. We race through the dry, burning north Indian heat of Delhi and Chandigarh and Jaipur to the sticky heat of Chennai, Kolkata and Mumbai, catching Pune and Hyderabad on the way, and sometimes stopping for the balm of Bangalore and the hills of Dharamsala.

As modern-day cricketers this is part of the deal and we are happy to dive right in. It is a whirlwind but we live in it, we thrive on it. In fact I, for one, love the IPL because it has helped young cricketers immensely, given them exposure, belief and financial stability. We must however deal with its demands. In the IPL, the body clock goes haywire because your games finish late, so you eat late, and after that you are too wired to go to bed quickly because the adrenalin has gone through the roof in most games. I suppose this drastic change in routine does not upset me too much because, like I said, I am a night owl and a late riser. But even I sometimes find myself sleeping like a jetlagged traveller, getting up only at lunch time and taking off to the next destination within a few hours. Your life and your routines are put through a blender non-stop for two months. Over and above this are winning and losing and the emotions that come with it.

My experience of the previous IPL seasons had taught me that if I was not extra careful my weight would shoot up. Weight doesn’t creep up on me, it pounces. Putting on three or four kilos is as easy as snapping my fingers and, if
you read the papers and see the news on TV, you know that in my line of work two kilos can just as easily be made to look like twenty. But call it a high metabolism rate or my good Punjabi genes, fortunately I don’t have a problem shedding weight. Yes, it takes work and it is a nuisance but it happens quite logically.

In this IPL, I had decided to be extra careful so I would not tip over into my danger zone, which is to go above 93 kilos. I decided to bring Varun Shivdasani, a personal trainer, over from England to travel with me through the event and make sure that I stuck to my training routine. Did that work well! He was always around to drag me to training. But even here, there was a puzzle. I was doing weights a lot but not putting on muscle mass. I was only becoming skinnier. I started to look like what I have always wanted to look like—a lean, mean fighting machine—but my stamina dropped like a stone.

There was an IPL game in Chennai against the Chennai Super Kings. We were chasing 143 and needed 35 runs off the last sixteen balls. Big shots were required and it was time to step on the gas. But because I was feeling unwell and also finding the strain of the innings and the weather a bit hard to handle, my breathing began to fall apart. I felt a spasm run through my chest. My heart was pounding at the slightest exertion. The palpitations became so unbearable that on one occasion when I ran 2 runs, I thought my heart would simply stop. I lost concentration and couldn’t clear the ball over the ring fielders’ heads. We lost the game.

I think about it now and wonder why through all this I did not really panic. Why did some casual, natural panic not kick in and send me straight to a doctor? I think it is simply because I am not that type of person. I have had problems and difficulties in my life, and my way of dealing with them is to compartmentalize and look at different segments rationally. In my totally uninformed but quite confident analysis, I figured I had breathing problems. It was a cough, I thought, it would go just as it had come.

As the IPL drew to a close, I sat back and thought about where I was and where I wanted to go. The World Cup was meant to bring closure to many things going on in my life. My own doubts, my father’s doubts. I had cried, I had
laughed and I had become, and was always going to be, a part of a World Cup champion team. Now the next step was: crack Test cricket.

I have always been aware that my position in the Test side is not secure. I have scored 169 in a Test match, and have been a part of big victories—Rawalpindi 2004, Chennai 2008—but in Tests I don’t have the kind of relaxed confidence I bring to the field in the one-day game. Test cricket tantalizes me. I think if I crack it once—completely and truly crack it—the right mindset will snap into place. Test cricket mattered to me before I had cancer and it matters to me that much now. I felt I had to play it enough to find a constant equilibrium. Coming from the World Cup, I was feeling more confident and peaceful than I had in a long time. I thought maybe if I got around five Tests in a row, it would be enough time to prove my worth to others and my determination to myself. If I achieved that, finally, the two problems that had dogged my life—finding my spot in the Test team and getting Dad to stop talking about Test cricket like it was unfinished, incomplete business—would be taken care of.

VVS Laxman says he has seen two Yuvraj Singhs on the field: one who plays ODIs and a completely different guy who plays Tests. We call VVS ‘Mama’, as in ‘uncle’, because he is like that young uncle in the family you go to when you need someone to understand what you are going through. He knows what I go through in the two formats and says that the more relaxed I am the better I play.

It’s not that I don’t get anxious playing ODIs. I do. As hell. But at the back of my mind in ODIs, I know that if I get set, I can win the game for my team. All I need to do is get through the first 20-odd runs and I am fine. I know how to set scores, how to chase totals. In Test cricket, my mind races, thoughts rush in like a flood and wash away any equilibrium I hope to achieve.

First, there’s the game situation. Then I start thinking about my technique— are my feet moving properly? Is my balance fine? Then I tell myself I have got to concentrate hard. Then I begin worrying about being absolutely clear when I’m going to leave the ball and when I’m going to play my pressure-releasing pull shot. In the middle of all this is the nagging idea that if I don’t score many runs in this game or the next, I might be out of the team.

After the IPL I poured my focus into the upcoming Tests. This is how my plan went: become solid in the West Indies and then play a Test at Lord’s in the next series. I had never done that and I told myself I could make it happen. Over the past two years, had I not made winning the World Cup my lone focus? That should be the lesson I told myself—if I want to get stuck into my Test cricket, I should make it the centre of my life and so I did.

As athletes we are trained to deny pain, to train and nourish our bodies lifelong so that the body will leave the mind alone. If it demands our attention, we are conditioned to make excuses to it and go on, play on, play hard, play harder. Sport is full of heroic stories of players and sportspeople winning in spite of injuries. Take Anil Kumble’s heroic, brave decision to fight on with a fractured jaw in 2002 in the West Indies. The point is that always in sport there is a chance to be brave. What is a little coughing and breathlessness then? At the same time, when we are in trouble with our body, we want to trust the people who bring us good news. Sometimes, I have to admit, we only want to hear the good news.

One of my most trusted allies in the business of sickness and health was Jatin Chaudhry. Jatin, who describes himself as a physiotherapist and acupuncture specialist, is around my age and a fit man himself. He made his reputation with what looked like miracle cures for athletes like the tennis player Sania Mirza and the golfer Arjun Atwal.

I first met him for an ACL tear on my left knee in 2006. The ACL or the anterior cruciate ligament (I told you, if you are a cricketer you know all this stuff) is one of the four major knee ligaments that holds the knee joint together, keeps it stable, supple and moving. An ACL tear can be brutal because torn ligaments can’t be fixed, like fractures, with casts. The torn ligament usually requires surgery, which all athletes hate because it means time away from sport. Despite an ACL tear I was able to hold off going under the knife because of Jatin’s acupuncture and, with it, the hours of work that I put into strengthening the knee. On the outside it can look like a miracle cure but miracles don’t happen if you don’t put in the effort.

My faith in Jatin grew when I had a shoulder injury in 2008. When there seemed to be no other solution, Jatin sorted out my shoulder with acupuncture.

For anyone who does not understand acupuncture, let me explain. Acupuncture means targeting with fine needles, at points, the pathways through which the blood flows into the centre of the problem area. In the case of my injuries, most of those points were in my hands so my treatment meant sitting in the clinic with thirty, forty, fifty needles stuck into my hands. I am one of those people who is very bad with needles. I can shout, howl, curse, but eventually I calm down and take the pain if I believe it will make me feel better.

Over the years I went to Jatin for various problems, from problems of the knee, to issues with the shoulder, to a fracture to the fingers. In the most difficult years of my career, I had greatly relied on and trusted Jatin.When the stuff about a tumour started to come up I gave his opinion and his therapy far greater attention than others’ and more than I probably should have.

Of course, hindsight is 20–20.

If I have to front up to a timeline of my denial, the end of May 2011 is the place to start. The IPL ended in the last week of May and with the first breather in more than six months, I had promises to keep with many people. Including one that I had made to Jatin that I would inaugurate his new sports injury clinic in collaboration with Dr PDS Kohli’s G-Scan Imaging and Diagnostics Centre in East of Kailash in New Delhi.

The day after the inauguration, I went to the clinic to meet Jatin to deal with some problems I was feeling in the fingers. I had been coughing during the inauguration and throughout the session with Jatin so, the following day, Dr Kohli advised me to get an X-ray. It could get done right there at their new sports injury clinic.

I asked Dr Kohli to phone me with whatever they found out when the X-ray was ready. X-rays don’t take very long and as I was leaving, Jatin stopped me at the door and said they wanted me to take a look at the X-ray plate. When I went into Dr Kohli’s room, he was frowning. Jatin himself looked a little worried.

They held up the X-ray to show me what was supposed to be a negative of my lungs. Except I could see one lung, the one on my right. On the left side there was nothing. Only a white cloud about 7–8 cm large in the place where my lung and my ribs should have been, as on the right side they were. It was the only thing visible, this white blur. Right away I knew I was looking at the reason for the coughing, the ragged breath, my fading endurance. The problem was right there in front of me, staring back at me. My stomach sank and I said, ‘What the hell is this?’

Dr Kohli’s reply was that whatever it was, it was ‘not good’. He advised me to get an FNAC test. The full form of FNAC I found out was fine needle aspiration cystology, so I knew it would involve needles. It would tell me more about the white cloud blocking my left lung. On the way home from the clinic, Jatin was in the car, and he fixed an appointment for an FNAC the following day, and we even stopped at a radiology clinic for a CT scan.

At the outset, our opinion on the white cloud hovered over ‘maybe it’s a patch of pneumonia, maybe bronchitis or tuberculosis’. Going by what Dr Kohli’s expression had said, the X-ray appeared to have ruled out bronchitis and pneumonia. The CT scan was to check if doctors could put it down to a bad case of tuberculosis.

When I compartmentalize my thoughts of that time and try and sort through them rationally I realize I was caught between two things. On the one hand there was the C word that inevitably comes to mind when you see a cloudy X-ray, and the dread attached to it: cancer is incurable, and even in better scenarios the side effects of the chemo that will be used to deal with it will surely end my working life. On the other hand there was the hope: even if it is a tumour it could be benign, there are benign tumours after all, and if it is benign we can deal with it through some other kind of therapy and medicines. Hope, even if its answers are ridiculous and vague, is a very powerful emotion. We all hope to find solutions to our most difficult problems, our worst nightmares. Your mind lurches for its  solutions. It gathers information from here and there and starts to present the ‘facts’ to you as worst-case scenario, best-case scenario, and this begins to feel like quite a scientific thought process. Then it holds on to the best-case scenario.

But without hope, what is there to life? We are all human, and that means we want to hear good news.

The next afternoon with my mother, some friends and Jatin, I went to a south Delhi clinic for the FNAC test. On any other day, a group of us can make a racket with our chatter and jokes. That day, it was quiet. No one spoke, there was nothing to say. We entered the imaging centre from a side entrance so we wouldn’t be noticed and were taken to a small ante-room. The waiting had already got my mind whirling. I wanted everything to be done quickly and the results to come out once and for all, conclusively.

The doctor doing the FNAC told me that the procedure required local anaesthesia because they were going to use a syringe to go right into the white area that had shown up in the X-ray. From it they would extract some fluid and
send it off to a lab. 

When the FNAC test began, I thought my body had become so used to needles that the pain would be distinct, yes, but familiar. It wasn’t. As the needle went into my chest, as it pierced skin, tissue and muscle, it wasn’t a mere syringe at work. It was as if the doctor had pulled a knife out of a fire and stabbed it right into my heart. I don’t know what the local anaesthesia was supposed to do but it couldn’t be this. Surely it wasn’t supposed to feel like torture or hell or death. In those few minutes, I felt trapped between living and dying. The doctor found me shouting at him, asking for the needle to be removed as soon as possible.

When I stepped out of the room, my face was white. As we drove home, I was numb, trying to absorb what had just happened but also wishing to forget it. Absorb but forget. Like I mentioned before, as a child I was always accidentprone. As a cricketer I had been through enough injuries that by now I knew I had a pretty high pain threshold. That afternoon in the imaging centre, the threshold was crossed. I experienced what I thought I would not be able to take again. It had lasted only a few minutes but it was terrifying.

That night sleep evaded me. Not because of memories of the FNAC but the dread of the result. A voice inside me said that things would be horribly bad. I fought it by telling myself that being negative never helped, and better days lay ahead. To sleep I tried all the tricks in the book. I counted sheep even though no one has ever explained why sheep, why not dogs? Or goats? I counted backwards from 1,000.I tried breathing exercises. Whenever the worst-case scenario popped up in my head, I tossed and turned. I told myself it cannot be, not to me, never ever.

I’m not sure what time I fell asleep but the next day unexpectedly, in the last week of May in Gurgaon, where I live when I am in Delhi, it started raining. The first day of pre-monsoon showers. From the time I can remember, I have waited eagerly for the first rains which come and put an end to the roasting of our north Indian summer. I opened the French windows of my living room, walked out into the open, took off my shirt and stood under the rain. The sky had darkened, the earth had begun to let out its unique aroma of relief and welcome to the water after dozens of hot, dry summer days. I turned my face to the sky and let the rain hit my skin and soak it. For a few precious moments, I lost myself, before being interrupted by the ringing of my phone.

Dr Kohli didn’t waste any time.

‘I’ve got bad news.’

‘Tell me, doc.’

‘It’s a tumour.’

‘What kind of tumour, doctor?’

‘It could be malignant.’ Before I could work out what he meant, his next four words were: ‘It could be cancer.’

A fist into the gut. Everything slows. The rain slows down. Is this the last rainfall I will feel on my skin? I hope he has not told Mom yet. It should be me. I have to find a way to tell her.

Dr Kohli doesn’t know. He hasn’t told her but he has told Jatin. Jatin may have told her.

I waited for the rain to stop before I went back indoors. At that moment I wanted to be twenty again, sticking my head out of Sandy’s car, shouting, ‘I am Yuvraj Singh, you know.’

Only this time what I really wanted to shout out was to the Gods above, that this cannot be happening to me. At one level I was confused. I thought, I am young, I am a sportsman, I am living my life full-tilt. I have just won a World Cup. How can I have cancer?

My mother was in the gurudwara when Jatin called her. When she came back home, she took one look at me and started to cry. Then Aneesh Gautam, a friend of nearly ten years whom I met when I started handling the earliest of my sponsorship deals, walked in through the front door. I told him and as soon as he heard he turned his face away to hide his tears. I decided to stay calm. On the surface I kept it together for the sake of Mom and my friend, who was visibly shocked and distraught.

Before other people close to me got the news from some other source, I had to tell them myself. I concentrated on that. So, I called Dad. I called Sandy. Sandy was driving in Delhi’s crazy traffic, caught in a gridlock at the top of a flyover somewhere. I told him I had bad news. In his comforting elder brother’s voice he said, ‘It’s ok. Tell me what’s happened.’ It’s a tone he uses with me to tell me it is ok, we can handle it, whatever it is, because we will tackle it together.

I took a deep breath. ‘The FNAC report has come through, Sandy-pa. The doctor told me it’s a tumour, and it could be cancer.’ Sandy’s response was completely disbelieving and mildly irritated. ‘Uff,’ he huffed, ‘I’m going to give you a slap, yaar. Be serious.’ When I told him I was serious, there was silence at the other end. Sandy wouldn’t speak. His wife told me later that he was crying.

Earlier, Dad had asked me if I was ok. I had said yes. He said I should make sure that the news was correct and that the treatment would be correct. Over the next few months he would become very upset about my illness and so would I when I would hear him talking about it on television and in the newspapers. It might take a while for our relationship to return to what it was but he is my dad and I will always be there for him.

With everyone to whom I broke the news, I was upbeat. Don’t worry, I said, I’ll be fine. I had no idea how I was going to be fine. My breathing had forgotten what fine really felt like.

After the initial shock, panic started to set in. If I lost my life to cancer, which I genuinely believed could happen, it would affect a lot of people around me. I would leave behind my parents, a younger brother, my friends. Financially, I had done enough for my family to be looked after well but look at how much I had upset everyone now, brought so much stress and grief on them. I have always wanted, and I guess I will always want, people around me to be happy. Maybe that makes me a grown-up kid or maybe it makes me a carefree soul. I think of myself as a positive person, who wants to help others. If people around me are laughing, it is a source of my joy.

That day we sat at the dining table wondering where to go next, what to do. Nishant, who at the time was still working in TV but who would soon become my manager, had been informed by Mom. He left office and joined us at the table. A friend of the family, Rajeev Bakshi, ‘Bunny’ or ‘Chacha’, was also there. The two of them would soon move to an adjacent room so they could work out ways to send me into treatment as soon as possible. Bunny and Nishant searched the internet, called up doctors they knew. By now Jatin was over too. He became a part of the discussions as we formed a core group of family and friends. I tried to keep it together but secretly I felt as if the walls were closing in.

In my family, my mother’s mum, my Nani had survived breast cancer but it had been attended to without chemotherapy. I heard people around me talking about radiation and chemotherapy. Other stories of cancer came up. A friend’s son had had cancer and the little child had to keep going into hospital for a year. Someone spelt out the side effects of chemotherapy. Nausea, vomiting (well, I’d had my share of that), hair loss.

Playing in a big way at the back of my mind were the horror stories I had heard of incorrect diagnoses and what it did to families. A few years ago my mate Murali Kartik told me about what had happened to his wife Shweta’s mother and the trauma for the family. Shweta’s mother was admitted in one of Gurgaon’s leading hospitals for the removal of her gall bladder due to gall stones. What was to be a laproscopy was suddenly changed into a full-scale surgery. When the doctors emerged from the operating theatre they declared that her gall bladder was in a ‘prime stage’ of cancer. They had taken material from it for tests, which they were sending to their lab. They said chemotherapy and radiation would have to start within three weeks. They gave her a year to live. Naturally the world came crashing down around the family. It took a lot of negotiating with the hospital to get them to hand over the samples and later the entire ‘block’ so as to have it tested again at the Tata Memorial hospital in Mumbai. Tata Memorial got back saying they had tested the block three times and could see no trace of malignancy anywhere. The family then moved her to another hospital in Delhi, where the gall bladder was removed through laproscopy and sent again for a biopsy. They found no trace of cancer.

I had never been able to shake the memory of this story out of my head. Probably there were far too many opinions and far too many theories and with it far too much confusion but everything sounded awful that day. By the end of the day I believed undergoing chemo was like living inside a dead body. It made me resort to the care of someone whom I had known for a while and who had successfully helped me in the past. That person was Jatin.

The FNAC report said that something was very wrong but they were not conclusive results. The FNAC report is not always the final word or the last step in cancer detection. I needed further tests.

Here Jatin stepped in decisively like he had done with many of my illnesses, and it is probably where I lost my bearings. His suggestion was that we try to tackle the tumour with alterative therapy, with acupuncture. He was able to convince me that his medication and treatment would reduce the size of the tumour and spare me the brutal effects of chemo and radiation.

I considered Jatin one of my friends. The door to my home was always open for him. He would surely always wish the best for me.

At some point in those first chaotic days it struck me that I was expected to be in the West Indies as one of the senior guys of the Indian team. I needed time off, away from cricket to deal with this thundercloud that had broken over my head. I needed to tell the Board, the BCCI president N Srinivasan, that I couldn’t make the tour. When we spoke, he was shocked but without a pause he promised me full support and said the news would be kept confidential. And it was. Despite the insanity of Indian cricket, it was clear right there who my people were. Indian cricket looks after its own and in that regard I now felt looked after from
the get-go.

As usual though a controversy was waiting in the wings. Dhoni had asked for rest and Suresh Raina had been named the captain to lead the team in the West Indies. When it was declared that I would rest too, the media discussions got heated up. They said I was not on the tour because I did not want to play under my junior. What can one say to these things? How could I tell them that it was illness, not ill-feeling. A cricketer’s job is to play cricket. I have played under Dhoni, under Gauti, who are my juniors. My job is to play cricket and I will play under any captain.

It was June when Jatin began his treatment with the promise that things were going to be fine. I felt the same, not worse. As the days passed by, I would sometimes switch on my computer and ask Mr Google, ‘What is cancer?’ When nearly 175 million answers popped up in one-twentieth of a second, I would baulk, shut my laptop and say forget it. It is being handled. During this period I was taking up to fifty tablets every day, Vitamin C, multi-vitamins, to boost my immunity. Over the coming months I would often run a temperature. Every three-four weeks I’d be down with 1000 F, an aching body, a bad stomach. About the tumour I told myself and everyone who asked that it was a kind of lump, a generic kind of tumour, and repeated what I had been told: it would shrink and go away and I would be fine.

Now I look back, I suppose a lot of this was driven by fear. I worried about what my life was going to be like if it was cancer. Of what people would say, what would be their reaction. They would have completely crazy theories about why I had cancer (and, predictably, when I did make the news public, a favourite conclusion was that I had lung cancer caused by heavy smoking. I try to stay away from newspapers and television but how can you keep away from those people whom you know who don’t hesitate to call or email or text about whatever is the latest theory doing the rounds).

At this time I turned into a complete gym rat. I was determined to be tip-top, in good shape and good humour. Cancer? Cancer happens to old people, cancer doesn’t happen to athletes. I was not yet thirty, I had a full life to live, there were appointments to keep, dreams to fulfil. The English summer and our Lord’s Test was there to look forward to. I had to find my peak. It became a diversion. You may wonder what everyone around me—my parents, my friends, my teammates —were saying. Well, whatever it was, I didn’t listen. Since I turned sixteen, I have been very independent. I have lived my life on my own terms. Maybe it made me pigheaded. Whatever caused it, the fact is that in the middle of 2011 I believed that the England Test series was my priority, and when I start to believe in something, that’s that. No one could get me to budge.

England could be the first step that I would take to establish my place in the Test team. Since Sourav retired in November 2008, the no. 6 spot had not been decisively claimed. Whoever did well in England and Australia this year could make it his own. In the year gone by, it had seemed so close, but injury and illness kept me out of one Test in 2010 and then I found I was dropped from the next when I was fit. I was done with missing Test cricket. I thought I had to play Test cricket because, whatever this was, tumour, lump, whatever, I did not want to die wondering what could have been.

In the meantime, the doctors who my friends and family were consulting about the test results, had not yet got to the bottom of my illness, and I thought I must live life normally as much as I could. I did not want to keep waiting for them, expecting the worst. Normalcy meant playing cricket, finding challenges, overcoming challenges, decoding the secret of Test success for myself, and thinking about things like how does one do well in alien conditions. In the gym I was doing well, and physically I was fit for international-level cricket. So if Jatin and the other doctors were giving advice against going to England, I didn’t much heed it. My attitude was, guys, I’ll do my job, you do yours. I have never played a Test in England and I want to. End of story.

I did manage to go to England. Some of my friends on the team—Sachin, Bhajju, Ashish, Zak, Laxman—knew about the tumour. When they heard about the possibility that it could be cancer and what the doctors were saying, their
faces would go pale and their immediate response was always the same: ‘Yuvi, you shouldn’t be playing, what are you doing?’ Then I would switch to my ‘don’t worry be happy’ mode and tell them that it wasn’t all that earth shatteringly serious, that I was taking medicines to tackle the tumour and was involved in doing therapies so I would get out of this soon.

It was confusing for everyone. When the physios looked at me, they saw a physically fit cricketer, involved in team football, in daily japes, in beating fitness tests. Then there was this tumour which was sometimes a tumour and sometimes a rumour. When I look back I see something I never really considered before: between being physically fit and medically fit there is indeed quite a big gap. ‘Fitness’ is mistakenly used as a catch-all term, a one-word concept, but it does not always translate into a good health condition.

In England my symptoms didn’t look any different from what they were during the World Cup. When someone saw me coughing and retching he would ask me what the matter was. I would say that it was a minor tumour, and we would all go back to our routines because this was a mighty important Test series.

In the Taunton tour opener, I had an awful game, leg before to Charl Willoughby for a duck. It put an end to my dream of a Lord’s Test. The Lord’s Test was the 2000th Test in the history of cricket, the 100th between England and India. We lost by 196 runs.

When we moved on to Nottingham for the second Test we found out that Gauti would not be playing. At Lord’s he was hit on the arm while fielding. With him out of the playing XI, Rahul Dravid was moved up the order to open and
everyone moved one slot higher. This meant a slot in the batting order had opened up. 

Trent Bridge is a beautiful ground but at the same time a beastly place for batsmen. The conditions and the wicket are very challenging. England batted first and we had them at 124-8 but their tail hung on to take them to 221.  When it was our turn to bat, I fell into my old Test match habit of lapsing into a mental state that I will call insensible.

As I sat on my chair in our Trent Bridge dressing room, the Test match-me took over. This is what went on in my head as always: maybe I am not good enough. Why haven’t I tasted success in Test cricket like I have in ODIs? In a limited-overs game I carry my self-belief into the ground like I carry my bat. Where is it now? What if I fail here? Are these the last five months of my Test career? Clearly, by now it is no guess that I had a fixation about becoming successful in Test cricket just as I had been in one days and Twenty20.

It was like butterflies stampeding in my stomach. I tried to remind myself of the positives, that my highest Test score was 169, that I had three centuries and that they were not bad centuries. Instead what was easier to remember was that I had not played an innings since the World Cup and the IPL. I hadn’t played enough days-cricket. It was a feeling in my bones. In the field, when England were batting, I had pushed hard and at the end of every session I felt winded. 

As I watched my team bat, I tried to settle my restlessness with a round of visualization. I closed my eyes for a few minutes and reminded myself that we had just won the World Cup for India, I had played with a lump in my chest and that I had been the Player of the Tournament. There was only one way to beat that achievement, and it was here and now. It was a grey and cloudy day. England’s bowlers had hit their stride and their fielders were all over the place. I was thinking, what if I score a century here. What if we win. What if I score a century, we win and I die. How would that be for a fairy-tale ending!

At 139–4, it was my turn to bat. After more than a year, I was finally going to play a Test match. As I walked through the gates of Trent Bridge, my legs were shaking a little. The ball was swinging. I could feel a shiver go up my spine. As I was walking out I looked around the full stands, heard their rumble, saw the fielders, the green turf, the scoreboard and the thought flashed through my head: I could have cancer. What am I doing here?

The moment I got to the crease and knocked gloves with Rahul, I felt good again. That old familiar feeling, a feeling I love—here is a job; come on, let’s go —settled over me. The ball was over fifty overs old and Rahul and I were able to get a good partnership going. When the second new ball came on, I was convinced that if I could see my way through the first seven or eight overs, I would be fine. If I could push through we could take a decent lead.

Rahul and I had batted together for more than two hours and put up 128 runs, and we had survived the new ball for about five overs. Then on the last ball of the sixth, I nicked one. I had scored 62 when I got out. We lost the next five wickets for 21 runs. The lead was 67.

In the second innings, we had to chase 478. The England bowlers were on top. I was facing Tim Bresnan, who got a short ball to jam into the index finger of my bottom hand. I should have walked off right then but I stayed put. I didn’t score too many but endured about fifty minutes of bruising Test cricket. Finally, Bresnan got me to fend one awkwardly and Alastair Cook took an easy catch. That was it. When I got back to the dressing room, Ashish Kaushik, the physio, took one look at my hand and told me my finger was broken. Just like that my Test series was over.

It took a month for the fracture to heal. Back at home, I watched on TV as India lost the Test series in England, and with it went our no. 1 Test ranking which we were so proud of. Barring Rahul and Sachin, no one had a good time. I knew I would get another chance during the home series in the three Tests against the West Indies.

I got back into the world of cricket. I watched the match telecasts, and I trained. We lost the one-day series that followed. Jatin’s ‘treatment’ wasn’t having the kind of impact it was supposed to have. Unlike my knee and shoulder problems, my breathing problem had not reduced even by a fraction. I thought about that a lot. Was the lump getting bigger, what could it do to my body, how the hell could I have cancer, what would it mean to go to an oncologist, what would they put me on: chemotherapy, radiation or surgery? What would it do to my career—affect it deeply, finish it? I could not imagine not being able to play cricket again. It was the one steady love affair I had had since my teenage. Would I be normal again? With the number of queries that played around in my head, I could have set a 100 marks exam paper with no answers. Only questions.

The stigma of cancer can perhaps defeat you more than the disease itself. Months later my oncologist Dr Nitesh Rohatgi told me that my refusal to admit the possibility of cancer was typical. The type of cancer I had largely affects young people, and he had seen that young patients who came to them almost always came in three or four months late.

As the weeks passed and I heard varying diagnoses for what I had but nothing changed in how my breathing felt, I finally grew restless about the situation. My friends, so far very respectful of my chosen therapy, now would tell me the same thing every time they saw me as they were saying goodbye and leaving the house. It would be, listen, Yuvi, don’t get annoyed, the treatment with Jatin is fine, but what is the harm in just getting it checked? I finally decided I needed to go through a biopsy.

That visit to the clinic became like a top-secret military operation in which every move had to be precisely planned and perfectly executed. An advance party would be led by Nishant and Dinesh Chopra, another journalist who is a
friend. It was ironic: these two wonderful people whose job it was to break stories were doing their best to hide mine. Nishant and Dinesh would check the entry and the exit for any TV crews or reporters lurking around the clinic. They would explain to the clinic staff who were going to deal with my case that secrecy was paramount. Then they would find a side door, direct us to it on our mobiles, and that’s where we would drive up. We would enter the clinic quickly. If anyone did see me passing, they would see me in a tight group of people, and before he or she could confirm the recognition in his or her mind, I would be too far down the corridor.

My biopsy was conducted around midnight, and I made it a point to tell the doctor that he had to give me general anaesthesia. After that FNAC shock, no more local anaesthesia surprises for me. The tumour was in a sensitive area so they decided to send a camera down first for which they made a small incision in my chest. When I regained consciousness, there were two stitches. Everyone around me was looking worried when the drugs started playing their tricks. Halfconscious, I said, ‘Where is the pen? I need a pen?’ Everyone’s mouths fell open. When the pen was finally produced, I said, ‘All right, now bring the paper.’ When they produced a sheet, I signed my autograph and, before they could ring up the psychiatry unit, went back to sleep. (I know, I know, but at least I did not ask for a teddy bear. Or a burger!)

Two days later, I left the house in Gurgaon with my stitches still on to travel 88 km to Rohtak. My plan was I would take part in two matches of the north zone leg of the Syed Mushtaq Ali T20 national tournament. Along with the biopsy, I had had a PET scan as well, in order to have an idea as to what exactly was inside my body and what it was doing to me.

Here I have to take a moment and say this. As I write my story, I think of how every lab, every clinic or hospital I went to kept their promise to me. We asked for absolute confidentiality and every doctor, senior and junior, lab technician, ward boy, assistant, receptionist, telephone operator kept his or her word. I wanted my troubles to be private and not one person who helped me get closer to a diagnosis ever leaked a word of it to anyone. So many people, everyone kept their promise. The news did not hit the media till I was in the USA for treatment.

When it was leaked, what was to hurt me the most, was where the news came from.

The PET scan confirmed that the tumour was not on the lungs but in between them. It showed that it was pressing down on the pulmonary artery, which was affecting the blood flow to the lungs. Once again, I was told to take it easy, not exert myself. Once again, I did not listen to the advice. Till I got a precise definition of my illness and a planned schedule for cure, I would not sit around feeling sorry for myself. My normal life demanded more respect.

For two consecutive days I commuted. To play for Punjab against Services at the DPS Ground in Rohtak and versus Jammu and Kashmir at the Bansi Lal Stadium in Lahli. They were low scoring games. Punjab lost to Services but beat J&K. In the first game I scored 2 and in the second game I was a joint-top scorer with 27.

With my finger healed, I was trying to prove my fitness and eagerness to anyone who might be looking. I was desperate to play the Tests against the West Indies. It paid off. I was selected to play in the first two Tests, in Delhi and Kolkata. Being back with the team was pure joy, because that has always been my work place, but I’m not sure what the boys thought of me throwing up between training sessions.

We won the match in Delhi. I had two largely forgettable innings there. I played the Kolkata Test with a fever where I found myself vomiting over and over again till it reached a point that the umpires began to get worried.

It puzzled the team management, and I heard that people around me were saying, ‘he is vomiting again and again, he can’t bat and he can’t bowl. Why is he here?’ By then I didn’t have any answers for anyone because I barely had answers for myself.

Of the many kinds of doctors that passed through Jatin’s clinic, Dr Ashish Rohatgi was hard to miss. An intenselooking, plain-speaking chest specialist, he was as strong and steady as those 10 kilo girders or sariyas that you see loaded on open trucks with red danger flags hanging from their ends. He chose to drop the doctor’s usual ‘bedside manner’ and never stopped badgering me about tackling my problem seriously. With the PET and biopsy reports in hand, he spoke with many of his peers and every time he would come back with grim findings. One doctor had suggested that I may have lymphoma. Every time new words were thrown up. Thynoma, thymoma, sarcoma. An independent cancer institute studied the results of the PET scan and offered ‘seminoma’. It would be an accurate assessment but it would be two months more before I confronted its truth.

What was seminoma, I asked Dr Ashish at one point. A rarest of rare kind of germ cell tumour, he explained, a manageable tumour. I asked him to explain further and this was his reply: Look, he said, your tumour may not be Sachin Tendulkar, but Virat Kohli it is. He can also be dangerous and after all you do need to get him out. I still laugh at this analogy. Later one day I remembered to tell Cheeku about this and he couldn’t believe how much respect the doctor had given him.

To show Dr Ashish Rohatgi the respect he deserved because he was showing great concern, I would nod my head and give him my verbal agreement. However, in my mind I would be shaking my head, ‘no way’, because my heart was set on succeeding in Test cricket.

What would have happened if someone had really put their foot down and given me the most awful bollocking of my life? What if someone had said, Yuvi, this is nonsense, let’s go and sort it out … Maybe I wouldn’t have listened to them anyway. Or maybe I would have. I know I am a dheet. Not easy to translate into English but it means I am the kind of person who can make the stubborn people of the world look flexible and obliging.

The only person to have ordered me around in my life is Dad. Once I left his home, I took my own decisions. There was never a ‘you can’t do this and you can’t do that’ attitude from Mom. Mom and I were more like friends who
discussed a lot of stuff. When I went into denial such was the force of my dheetpana, obstinacy, it swept everyone else along.

With poor scores of 23, 18 and 25 against the West Indies, I didn’t play the third Test at the Brabourne Stadium in Mumbai and was clearly in no position to tackle the ODIs either. We informed the BCCI that I would need a little more time to get fully fit again. I decided my target would be the ODI series in Australia which was two months away. At the same time I put out a statement which said that I had an ‘abnormal tumour’ on the lung, which would need to be treated through proper medication and therapy. Privately, I compartmentalized my days and segmented my life once more: between things that I was required to do, i.e. training, practice; and the things my body made me do, i.e. coughing, vomiting.

Then one day everything collapsed. Ashish Kaushik, the Indian team physio, forwarded me a letter he had received from the ICC asking for an explanation about the unusual parameters that had showed up in my anti-doping test results. During the Delhi Test, the ICC had carried out one of their random checks. It was in compliance with WADA rules and I had no problems giving them the required samples.

In their letter to Ashish Kaushik, however, the ICC wanted to know how my blood sample had showed up Beta-HCG, a hormone never found in healthy men. It is usually considered a pregnancy marker in women. It would have been funny if it had not been so serious. 

The ICC’s letter became the first time that a formal explanation was sought for what was harbouring in my body. It was the first time everyone around me, and I myself, was forced to face the fact that acupuncture was in fact not working. 

June to November, it had been more than five months. I would go to Jatin’s clinic and get the needles in my hand—sometimes fifty, sometimes forty, thirty. Sometimes it was uncomfortable and most times it was unbearable. It was my choice to go with Jatin’s therapy. I will put my hand up and admit that every time. It was no one else’s decision but mine. But after his treatment didn’t show results for one or two months, I think maybe it was my friend’s responsibility to say to me, look, I can’t cure you. Even if he was in denial too, Jatin could have stopped giving me the non-stop false confidence that good days were round the corner. Vomiting and coughing blood? That was the emission of all the toxins. The lump, he said, was shrinking.

When the ICC letter came, the tissue culture slides had been in various hospitals. The same answers that I had so deliberately not heard, I had to demand now to be shown to me again.

We could not tell Jatin to respond to the ICC because he was not a qualified medical practitioner. It was left instead to Dr Ashish Rohatgi to draft a reply.

During these disturbing weeks, I divided my time between Mumbai, where I have an apartment in Bandra which I love, and Bangalore at the National Cricket Academy. While all this was going on I tried to segregate my worlds again. I upped the level of my training. I trained harder; then I trained my hardest. I was going to be fit for Australia in January. If Test cricket had been a distraction earlier, the Australia ODIs worked to take my mind off the paperwork going back and forth with the ICC.

At the NCA, Ashish Kaushik was happy with the numbers I was beginning to turn out after his drills. We were working on endurance and strength, so we did running drills, yo-yo drills (where you do short bursts of sprinting and recovery) and work in the gym. I was doing weights and 100 kilo leg presses like Mr Universe. In terms of endurance and power, it looked like I could be put on the next flight to Australia.

Meanwhile, the year turned over and brought bad news for the team in the Border–Gavaskar Trophy. Once again we had lost every Test match in the series. But there was a belief that the team could get back into its groove with the trination series that was going to start in the first week of February. I was  determined and believed that if I kept up my training no one would stop me from getting on the plane to Australia. One day, after I passed his tests with flying colours, I told Ashish Kaushik I was done with the scans, I didn’t need to have any more scans. His simple response was silence.

I didn’t know at that point that there had been meetings in Delhi without my knowledge. Dr Ashish Rohatgi had spoken to Nishant and convinced him that more needed to be done. Together they had demanded answers for why the therapy was not working from Jatin, and Jatin finally had no answers. Dr Rohatgi had got in touch with Ashish Kaushik. He had told him that he may have been supervising the hardcore physical training of a cancer patient. 

Ashish Kaushik, always a kind and gentle soul, had heard enough. Quietly and firmly he informed me, as I made my grand declaration, that there was no way he was letting me out of the country without one final, independent scan at a lab of his choice. This was required by the Board so he was going to do his job and make sure I got it done. 

Meanwhile, oblivious of this tussle, the media was of the impression that I already had a foot on the plane. I had given interviews all around that I was ‘raring to go’ to Australia. The date for the Puma ad too had arrived. With Alonso and Bolt it was going to be the coolest ad I would have done till now, I thought. I planned carefully how I would shoot the ad in Europe, jet back to Delhi and be off to Australia within the week. Stuck now with Ashish Kaushik’s immovable insistence, I said ok, let’s go get that damn scan out of the way. That evening I had a jam-packed diary: after the scan I needed to get a massage and then a television interview that I had committed to. When I headed out with Ashish to the Manipal Hospital for the last CT scan, I was virtually buzzing with excitement thinking about the week ahead. I was about to be set free.

Manipal Hospital was packed with patients and their visitors and families, doctors and nurses and wardboys. Once again we went through the side entrance and charged through the corridors. The doctor doing the CT Scan was Dr RV Parmeswaran, the head of Manipal Hospital’s nuclear medicine and PET-CT department. With specs and a moustache, smiling, he was a kind and welcoming man, and he looked at all my documents efficiently. It seemed as if everything would be tied up in double quick time.

After the scan I waited for Dr Parmeswaran and while I waited I had something to eat. CT Scans are done on four to five hours of fasting. In a while Dr Parmeswaran came back into the room where we were waiting and the face
he wore told me immediately that he had just seen a catastrophe. Sometimes in life you can see the bad news before you hear it. Dr Parmeswaran spoke softly to Ashish and I saw Ashish’s expression change. Then Dr Parmeswaran turned to me and with considerable emotion said, ‘What are you doing? Do you not know what is wrong with you? You have to be admitted. Now.’

My instinctive reaction was I would pretend I hadn’t heard him. I would shake his hand and thank him, and tell Ashish Kaushik that I was on my way. Before I could open my mouth, I saw that together they had joined into a wall. There was no going through, there was no slipping past. There was nothing I could do but listen. They told me what I didn’t want to hear. The lump was 15x13x11cms. It had grown in the chest cavity and was pressing hard on the pulmonary artery and had squeezed the left lung. Ashish told me my heart could have burst.

So. Here it was. This was it. My cancer. I had cancer. It was not lung cancer, it was not lymphoma, it had not spread; it was a tumour and it was growing. The doctors now believe that my heart didn’t burst despite a compressed pulmonary artery because I had trained so hard.

Australia? What about all the fitness tests I passed? Laying it down as clearly as he possibly could Ashish said there was no way I could take part in any cricket until I had got my cancer treated. I was gutted.

Then I remembered the impending TV interview. How stupid would it be, dishing out this raring-to-go bullshit in front of the camera? The TV anchor had flown down from Delhi for the interview and we explained my situation to him in clear terms. He sat there looking sorrowful. He sympathized and offered solace for ten minutes. After which he told us that his channel had spent a lot of money to get the entire camera unit set up at the hotel. So why didn’t we do the interview anyway?

I gave the interview. So why were India doing so badly in Australia I was asked. I did my best to defend my team. What about my future, my immediate plans? I avoided giving a straight answer. My head had just been shoved into a drain. I had a tumour in my chest the size of a small melon. What was I being asked, what was I supposed to say. That interview was an out of body experience. My mind was elsewhere and from some other place, some other person,  not the distraught, shattered me, kept dishing out the clichés.

When I returned to my room after the scan and the TV interview I was empty and angry. Bhajju came over to my room to talk rubbish and lift my chin and spirits. He did his best and Bhajju’s best is side-splitting funny. Would we miss out on Australia or would the wilder parts of Australia miss out on us, eh? As long as he was around, he made me laugh even in the middle of a gloom that threatened to overtake me.

A few hours later, he had to leave. My room went silent. There was no one else there but me and my cancer.

I knew somewhere in the background people would be on the phone, booking flights, hotels, fixing appointments, finding options, researching them. I would be looked after. My mother had been told. When we spoke she was completely in control. She wasn’t panicked, she wasn’t crying. But later that night I did. I cried like a baby. When no one could see me or hear me. Not because I feared what cancer would do but because I didn’t want the disease. I wanted my life to be normal, which it could no longer be.